The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness on Sellers' Strategies in Open English Auctions: Reserves and Covert Shilling

Atanu R. Sinha · Eric A. Greenleaf
College of Business, University of Colorado, Campus Box 419, Boulder, Colorado 80309-0419, atanu.sinha@colorado.edu The Stern School of Business, 44 West Fourth Street, New York University, New York, New York 10012, egreenle@stern.nyu.edu

Abstract
In practice, the rules in most open English auctions require participants to raise bids by a sizeable, discrete amount. Furthermore, some bidders are typically more aggressive in seeking to become the "current bidder" during competitive bidding. Most auction theory, however, has assumed bidders can place any tiny "continuous" bid increase, and recommend as optimal the tiniest possible increase.
This article examines how incorporating discrete bidding and bidder aggressiveness affect optimal strategies for an important decision for auction sellers, which is setting the lowest acceptable bid at which to sell the property. We investigate two alternative methods sellers often use to enforce this decision. These are setting an irrevocable reserve before the auction, and covert shilling, where the seller or confederates pose as bona fide bidders and raise bona fide bids, unsuspected by bidders. These optimal strategies interest auction participants, especially sellers who must recognize the bidding rules and bidder aggressiveness they will encounter in actual auctions. We also examine how these strategies change with the auction context, such as the number of bidders, and how they differ from corresponding strategies already identified for continuous bidding. Our model examines open English auctions where bidders have independent, private valuations. We find that discrete bidding does affect these strategies, as does the aggressiveness of the bidder with the highest valuation, relative to the average aggressiveness of all other remaining bidders.
We identify the seller's optimal discrete reserve, and show that if the highest valuator is relatively more (less) aggressive, this increases (decreases) from the optimal continuous reserve, and also increases (decreases) as the number of bidders increases. With continuous bidding, by contrast, this reserve is invariant to the number of bidders. As this bidder becomes relatively more aggressive, for a given number of bidders, the optimal discrete reserve increases, while as he or she becomes less aggressive, the seller's expected auction utility increases, which increases the set of auctions where
Marketing Science  2000 INFORMS Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000, pp. 244­265

discrete bidding generates higher seller welfare than continuous.
We propose a covert shilling model that requires shilling sellers, and any confederates and auctioneers, to outwardly act no differently than with reserves, to avoid detection. We identify cases where the seller optimally shills once the bona fide bidding has stopped, and identify the corresponding optimal point to stop shilling and accept the next bona fide bid, if offered. This stopping point does not depend on where bona fide bidding stops, or aggressiveness, or the number of bidders, or on whether shill bids alternate with bona fide bids or are consecutively entered. We also find that the optimal lowest acceptable bid with shilling can be higher (lower) than that with reserves if the highest valuator is sufficiently unaggressive (aggressive). By comparison, in continuous bidding shilling and reserves yield identical lowest acceptable bids.
Sometimes the seller using a shilling strategy optimally should not shill at all, and instead accept the bid where bona fide bidding stops. This can occur when that bid, or the number of bidders, is sufficiently high, or when the highest valuator is as, or less, aggressive than other bidders. Optimal shilling can be as practical to implement as reserves, because it does not require sellers to have any information beyond that needed in a reserve auction.
If sellers shill optimally, they can never be worse off compared to using a reserve, and can be better off. Shilling can make bidders worse off, but can also make them better off when the seller using a shilling strategy optimally accepts bids below the optimal reserve. In these latter cases, shilling Pareto dominates reserves, ex ante.
We provide numerical examples to illustrate these results. We discuss how our results might be affected if shilling is not covert, or bidders' valuations have a common value component rather than being independent, or by the rules used in many discrete bid Internet auctions. (Auctions; Internet Auctions; Discrete Bidding; Pricing; Bidder Behavior)
0732-2399/00/1903/0244/$05.00 1526-548X electronic ISSN

THE IMPACT OF DISCRETE BIDDING AND BIDDER AGGRESSIVENESS ON SELLERS' STRATEGIES IN OPEN ENGLISH AUCTIONS

1. Introduction
One of an auction seller's most important decisions is setting the lowest acceptable price at which to sell the property.1 Sellers often choose from two alternative methods to enforce this price. They can set an irrevocable reserve before the auction, and bid publicly "on behalf of the reserve" by raising lower bids, thereby rejecting them. This reserve can be public, or known only to the seller. Or, sellers can shill covertly, which is usually considered disreputable. Here the seller publicly claims to use a reserve, but actually rejects bona fide bids by raising them during the auction while covertly posing as a bona fide bidder (Cassady 1967, pp. 168­69, 174, 212­14; Graham et al. 1990, Smith 1989, pp. 148­55), and bidders do not anticipate or detect this. We do not model, but do discuss later, bidders who suspect or can detect that sellers are shilling, and modify their bidding.
Optimal strategies for sellers and bidders depend on an auction's rules. One of the most popular auctions is the open English auction (OE), where bidders raise each others' bids until only one bidder is left. Most normative models of OE auctions have assumed rules of "continuous" bidding that permit any bid increase, no matter how tiny; in such models the bidders' optimal bid raise is usually just greater than zero (e.g., McAfee and McMillan 1987; p. 707), a result that affects sellers' optimal reserve and shilling strategies.
In actual practice, however, most OE auctions use rules that require bids to increase by at least a specified amount (see Smith 1989, pp. 94­98). These rules have existed for centuries (Brough 1963, p. 26, provides an example from 1744), and courts have upheld their use (Taylor v. Harnett, 55 N.Y. Suppl. 988). Many auctioneers specify these increments in advance, and they can be considerable. Christie's and Sotheby's catalogs specify increments of approximately 5% to 10% of the current bid. Most Internet auctions also use discrete bid rules (e.g., www.eBay.com). Although auctioneers typically have discretion to recognize smaller increases, few would accept anything near the "epsilon"
1Sellers also should try to attract as many auction bidders as possible (Bulow and Klemperer 1996, Engelbrecht-Wiggans 1987). Our model does not cover situations where the number of bidders depends on the reserve.

increases optimal in auction models that assume continuous bid rules.
Existing models of discrete bid auctions have also assumed that all remaining OE bidders seek to become the current bidder with equal aggressiveness. However, auction observers suggest that bidders often have different levels of aggressiveness. This can also affect sellers' optimal strategies. Continuous bid models have not studied aggressiveness because it does not affect their outcomes.
The present research identifies optimal reserve and covert shilling strategies for sellers in OE auctions with discrete bid rules and allows aggressiveness to vary among bidders. We study this for two reasons. First, whereas research on discrete bidding has examined such questions as optimal increments and allocation efficiency, assuming equal aggressiveness (Rothkopf and Harstad 1994b, Yamey 1972), optimal reserve and shilling strategies in these auctions have not been examined, nor has the impact of varying aggressiveness. Investigating these issues can increase the realism of auction theory and bring it closer to actual practice and bidder behavior, an approach urged for auction research (Rothkopf and Harstad 1994a).
Second, we also provide useful qualitative insights for auction practitioners, especially sellers. These show that discrete bidding and aggressiveness often do change optimal reserve and shilling strategies compared to those with continuous bidding. We identify the nature of these changes and the auction contexts in which they occur. We also examine how directional changes in auction characteristics (such as the number of bidders, the increment, and aggressiveness) affect optimal strategies. This can help sellers adapt strategies to a particular auction.
We study these issues in the context of the independent private value (IPV) model of bidder valuation (Harris and Raviv 1981, Myerson 1981, Riley and Samuelson 1981, Vickrey 1961), where bidders draw valuations from a common, continuous distribution. We find that optimal reserve and shilling strategies in these discrete bid auctions differ from those for continuous bidding as follows:
1. When the bidder with the highest valuation is relatively more (less) aggressive compared with all

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

245

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

other remaining bidders as a whole, the seller's optimal reserve increases (decreases) past the optimal continuous reserve and increases (decreases) with the number of bidders. When this aggressiveness equals the other bidders', the optimal continuous and discrete reserves are equal.
2. The seller's expected utility with a reserve increases as this bidder becomes less aggressive, for any given number of bidders. This increases the set of auctions where discrete bidding produces higher expected seller utility than continuous bidding.
3. If the seller uses a covert shilling strategy, optimal reserve and shilling can differ:
a. If it is optimal to shill even once, the optimal lowest acceptable bid can differ from the optimal reserve, if this bidder's relative aggressiveness differs from others', and does not depend on where bona fide bidding stops or the number of bidders.
b. Sometimes the seller's optimal shilling strategy is to accept the highest bona fide bid and not submit even one shill bid. Whether to do so depends on the number of bidders, provided the highest valuator is relatively less, or equally aggressive, compared with others.
c. Auctions exist where using shilling Paretodominates reserves. In other cases, shilling's disrepute for benefitting sellers at bidders' expense is justified.2 With continuous bidding, shilling and reserves yield the same expected seller utility. The differences in 3a­ 3c do not occur in continuous bid auctions, where optimal shilling and reserve strategies yield the same lowest acceptable bid and the same expected utilities for seller and bidders (Graham et al. 1990).
Shilling is illegal in many jurisdictions, but its existence has long been acknowledged and continues today. Our purpose is not to advocate it, but rather to study how optimal shilling depends on the discrete bid rules used in essentially all progressive auctions and on bidder aggressiveness.
Discrete bidding is such an entrenched auction practice that all participants usually must accept these rules
2If bidders draw valuations from different distributions and the seller knows these distributions and how many bidders draw valuations from each, the optimal lowest bid to accept differs with shilling versus reserves, sellers can increase their utility by shilling, and the optimal point to stop shilling depends on where bona fide bidding stopped (Graham et al. 1990, Figure 1).

and cannot employ them only when they benefit. Many Internet auctions also require discrete bidding, providing further evidence that these rules are widely accepted. Thus, this article addresses the scenario in which sellers must accept discrete bidding and determine their optimal reserve and shilling strategies accordingly. We do not seek to model a single motive for discrete bidding, nor claim that sellers use this practice only when it increases the seller's welfare. Several such motives have been proposed, and more than one may operate in any given auction.
Yamey (1972) shows that discrete bidding decreases the seller's OE auction utility in two auction outcomes, but increases it in another, compared with continuous bidding. The net impact on the seller's expected utility depends on these outcomes' relative probabilities. Bidders can prefer discrete bidding in the first two outcomes, which also decrease the winning bidder's expected payment, but this also lowers allocation efficiency. Discrete bidding also speeds up auctions, which saves bidders time and lowers their participation costs (Rothkopf and Harstad 1994b). The "epsilon" bid increases assumed by continuous bid models create very long auctions, of infinite duration if taken to the limit.
The auction models we present describe OE auctions with all bidders either present or bidding by telephone. They do not subsume all possible discrete bid rules or every issue that might arise with reserves or shilling. So many variants of OE rules exist in practice that no single model and set of assumptions can include them all. We discuss important limitations of our assumptions and suggest how departures might change our results, for example, when assuming bidders do not anticipate or detect shilling or in the case of Internet auctions. For reasons of space, we do not consider sellers who start shilling once their prior reserve price is met, such as might occur if a bidder's outright comments suggest a willingness to pay a higher price.
2. The Optimal Reserve with Discrete Bidding
The Seller. A risk-neutral or risk-averse seller desires to sell at an OE auction a single item that he or she values at v0, where v0  0 and is private to the seller.

246

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

We assume either the seller holds the auction or pays an auctioneer a fixed fee. We do not examine auctioneers that receive a commission based on the sales price. Such commissions' implications are discussed later.
The seller's auction profit, pS, is his auction revenue less v0. His utility function for this profit is U(pS), where U(pS)  0 for revenue v0. Only the seller knows U(·). We assume U(pS) is linear or concave, strictly increasing in pS, and the seller seeks to maximize expected utility E[U(pS)]. The seller rejects any bid below v0.
The Reserve. We define the reserve, vD, as the lowest bid at which the seller will sell the property. We assume the seller sets vD irrevocably before the auction, announces to all bidders that a reserve is in effect, and can either keep its amount private or public. Reserves are typically considered ethical provided bidders are told a reserve exists. We assume if the property fails to sell the seller will not sell it in the near future, because this makes the reserve less credible.
The Bidders. We assume there are n bona fide bidders, with 2  n  . The bidders need not know n, and we will examine whether the seller must know n to determine optimal reserve and shilling. Bidders draw valuations independently from the same continuous distribution, with c.d.f. F(v), p.d.f. f(v), and range [v, v¯]. Only the ith bidder knows his or her vi. Thus, bidders have independent, private valuations (Myerson 1981, Riley and Samuelson 1981, Vickrey 1961).3 We assume the seller knows F(v), but our results apply regardless of whether bidders do.4 The vi
3The IPV model has been extended to include bidders drawing valuations from different distributions (e.g., Graham et al. 1990, Myerson 1981). Our model does not cover such situations. 4We assume f(v)/(1  F(v)) is strictly increasing (Appendix Assumption 1). Assumption 1 holds in most auction models--otherwise they can yield the anti-intuitive results that the winning bidder's expected payment decreases as his valuation increases (Myerson 1981), which can imply that the seller's optimal strategy is to randomly choose a winning bidder (McAfee and McMillan 1987, p. 708). This assumption occurs in many other economics and industrial organization models (Tirole 1988, p. 156). Distributions meeting it include the uniform, normal, exponential, logistic, and any with increasing density. Certain log-normal, Weibull, and generalized gamma functions meet this assumption, whereas others do not.

are ordered v(1)  v(2)  . . .  v(n), associated respectively with bidders B1, . . . , Bn. Bidders can have any risk orientation, which can vary across bidders. We assume these bidders use their optimal bidding strategy, which in a continuous, OE auction with IPV valuations is to bid against competition and reserves up to their valuations, regardless of risk orientation, F(v), and whether they know F(v) (Vickrey 1961), or n or vD (Riley and Samuelson 1981).5 This applies, also, to discrete auctions, where Bi optimally bids up to and including the highest level not exceeding v(i) (Rothkopf and Harstad 1994b, Yamey 1972).
Many auction models assume IPV bidders, including those addressing discrete bid auctions (Rothkopf and Harstad 1994b) and shilling with continuous bidding (Graham et al. 1990). However, no single model of bidder valuation always holds (McAfee and McMillan 1987, p. 705). The IPV assumption is appropriate when bidders form valuations independently of other bidders' information, and cannot increase their expected auction utility by changing vi as they observe bids. IPV bidders are not concerned with a "common value" component of property's value, determined by subsequent use or resale (Capen et al. 1971; see Milgrom and Weber 1982 on "affiliated value" auctions with both common and private value components). IPV valuations might occur for property bought only for personal use.
The Bidding Increment. We assume the auction rules require bidding to proceed using an exogenously determined, public, and constant increment I, where I k 0 to reflect the not inconsequential increments usually used in auction practice. Auctioneers usually "open" the auction with a bid sa, which is well below vD, and then will only recognize bids of sa  kI, where k is a positive integer (see Definition 1 in the appendix). For expositional clarity we assume I is constant, but our results hold when I varies with the bid level in a manner made public in advance. This occurs in some
5When bidders are risk-averse, first-price, continuous auctions produce higher expected revenue for the seller than OE auctions (Matthews 1980, 1987; Riley and Samuelson 1981). Because OE auctions are so popular, however, we examine OE results for risk-averse bidders, while acknowledging that in such cases sellers might want to consider a first price auction.

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

247

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

actual auctions. Since varying I as bids increase can sometimes maximize E[U(pS)] (Rothkopf and Harstad 1994b), sellers might wish to set I endogenously. This may be difficult to implement, however, because in practice I is traditionally a round number such as $100 or $1,000.
We assume I  (v¯  v0)/2. A very large I forces the seller to accept the first bid exceeding v0, since no vi is likely to exceed the next, much greater bid level. We also assume the current bidder will not raise his own bid, and that bidders do not raise bids by more than one increment. Although this latter "jump bidding" is not optimal for discrete bidders where f(v) is nonincreasing, we do not examine its optimality here (see Rothkopf and Harstad 1994b, who show that jump bidding can be optimal when f(v) is increasing, in which case this decision can also depend on knowing n). Thus, bidding ends unless another bidder raises this bid or the seller bids on behalf of the reserve.
Bidding on Behalf of Reserve. Let vD denote the seller's discrete reserve and vD* the optimal reserve that maximizes E[U(pS)]. If bona fide bidding stops below vD, we assume the auctioneer "bids for the reserve" by raising one increment. This is standard procedure in most reserve auctions.6 Although bids below vD are typically recognized, they cannot buy the property.
We assume that once the current bid is vD  2I the auctioneer immediately bids vD  I. This practice, known as keeping the bidding "in step" (Cassady 1967, p. 153) or on the "right foot" (i.e., correct foot), is standard in many OE auctions and required to invoke the reserve.7
Bidding Aggressiveness. A person's bidding aggressiveness describes the probability that he secures
6E.g., rules in Christie's New York American Art sale No. 8886 on May 21, 1998, under "Bidding," state, "The auctioneer may also execute bids on behalf of the consignor to protect the reserve . . . up to the amount of the reserve. . . . Under no circumstances will the auctioneer place any bid on behalf of the consignor at or above the reserve . . ." (p. 5). 7This ensures that bidders can purchase at vD. If a bidder raises to vDI but no other bidder subsequently raises, the auctioneer must bid vD, which blocks the bidder from winning at vD. This violates the reserve. This is why the bidding rules in footnote 6 prohibit auctioneers from bidding at the reserve. If the reserve is alternatively

the bid at the next level when bidding is below his optimal highest bid, and j other bidders also remain (1  j  n  1). We refer to this probability as that person's "bid probability," denoted ( j ). Aggressiveness does not affect any outcomes or utilities in continuous OE auctions, where bidders can raise the current bid by an infinitesimal, essentially costless amount, and so cannot gain or lose by holding, or not holding, the current bid. Aggressiveness does affect outcomes and utilities with discrete bidding, since raising a discrete bid increases the required payment by I, and any Bi cannot raise a bid below v(i) if the next discrete increment exceeds v(i). Prior work on discrete bidding (Rothkopf and Harstad 1994b, Yamey 1972) has assumed that all bidders have equal aggressiveness. This is certainly a reasonable starting assumption.
However, many auction writers observe that aggressiveness often varies across bidders, based on behavior such as the following: "whether to be bold or cautious in initial bidding" (Cassady 1967, p. 147); "When to jump in is up to [the bidder]. Neophytes often get in early, then fade. . . . It's probably better to wait . . . then pounce" (Dobrzynski 1995); "There are two schools of thought . . . aggressive and jumping in early [versus] . . . the `hang back and see what develops method'" (Roberts 1986, pp. 41­42). Auctioneers have also observed aggressiveness differences--"`There'll be ten bids the first few seconds . . . then it's usually down to two or three. Then some guy who sits in the background jumps in . . .'" (Rubin 1972, pp. 28­29).
Bidding aggressiveness may vary across IPV bidders for several reasons. Bidders may find the competition and public attention from aggressive bidding either enjoyable or stressful. Some bidders may not mind bidding unsuccessfully, whereas others may feel defeat. Some may flamboyantly attract the auctioneer's attention by calling bids loudly or waving their paddles, whereas others are timid. In each case the former bidder is more likely to obtain the current bid, all else equal. Because our model uses IPV bidders, we do not examine aggressiveness variations caused by common
defined as one increment below the lowest acceptable bid, and thus the last point where the auctioneer bids on its behalf, v*D must be decreased one increment.

248

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

value factors, such as avoiding early bids to prevent revealing your interest to others.
Low bidder aggressiveness creates "sniping" in timed Internet auctions, where a new bidder waits until the last second to bid. Irritated comments on sniping often appear in online bulletin boards. Although the time limits of OE Internet auctions are not included in our model, the rise of sniping in these relatively new Internet auctions suggests that aggressiveness varies even in some new auction types.
We do not claim that aggressiveness always differs across bidders, but it often does, and this affects optimal reserve and shilling. If aggressiveness matters, sellers will want to obtain information that helps estimate aggressiveness differences. Although we could separately model each behavioral factor affecting aggressiveness, we feel that to obtain useful qualitative insights from a tractable model, it is more appropriate to discuss the several reasons aggressiveness may vary, as just done, and incorporate their influence in a single aggressiveness variable. We show that the seller's optimal strategies depend on the aggressiveness of Bn, the bidder with the highest valuation, relative to that of the other remaining bidders collectively.
If all bidders strategically adjust aggressiveness to the level that most benefits them and if this is the same for all bidders, an equilibrium can arise where all bidders will be equally aggressive. Although some bidders may regard aggressiveness this way, we feel it is reasonable to assume that often one or more bidders do not and have certain bidding habits or personality characteristics that make their aggressiveness differ from that of other bidders. Consequently, we specify aggressiveness as an exogenous behavioral factor in the model rather than as a behavior that bidders adjust strategically. Our model examines all three situations where Bn is relatively more aggressive, less aggressive, or equally aggressive compared with the other remaining bidders collectively.
Modeling Bn's Relative Aggressiveness. We assume neither the seller nor any bidder knows who is Bn. Let ( j ) represent the "bid probability" that Bn obtains the current bid at sa  kI when bidding against j other remaining bidders who also have vi  sa  kI, where 1  j  n  1. Note that ( j ) includes both the

probability that Bn does not obtain the bid at sa  kI, and that Bn holds the bid at sa  (k  1) I and so does not bid. We define that (·) depends on j, and assume that it does not depend on n (note that bidders need not know n). If Bn has "neutral" relative aggressiveness, defined as equalling the average aggressiveness of these j remaining bidders, then ( j )  [1/( j  1)].
We define that ( j ) strictly increases with Bn's relative aggressiveness for any given j. We also assume that ( j ) cannot be constant for all j (this eliminates ( j )  0 or 1 anywhere in j). A constant ( j ) implies that Bn's chances of obtaining the current bid do not depend on how many bidders compete against him at sa  kI, which is counterintuitive. Even the most aggressive possible Bn has at most ( j ) just less than 0.5, since he must be the underbidder at at least every other level (except immediately after an auctioneer's "right foot" bid, in which case ( j ) could be just below 1).
We represent Bn's relative aggressiveness as ( j ) given her actual aggressiveness minus ( j ) given neutral aggressiveness, defined as v( j )  ( j )  (1/( j  1)). To allow a succinct yet general exposition, the proofs focus on the variable n, which is the minimum of v( j ) for aggressiveness (thus, v( j )  0) or the maximum of v( j ) for unaggressiveness, (thus, v( j )  0) for j  1, 2,. . . , n  1. n  0 represents a Bn with "neutral" relative aggressiveness (as assumed in Rothkopf and Harstad 1994b, Yamey 1972), n  0 a relatively aggressive Bn, and n  0 a relatively unaggressive Bn. Note that (·) is a function of j, while n can be either dependent or independent of n. To accommodate a wide range of aggressiveness behavior, we do not impose any particular functional form on the relationship between (·) and j or between n and n, and allow n to be either independent or dependent on n. We sometimes refer to Bn's relative aggressiveness as "aggressiveness."
We do assume that as j changes, a given bidder must always stay relatively aggressive, or unaggressive, or neutral, and cannot "switch" among these three categories. Our model is not intended to cover switching bidders. They do not have any consistent aggressiveness, and a more complex form of ( j ) is required to accommodate their switches. Formally, then, for each bidder, ( j )  (1/( j  1)) is always either equal to zero, or less than zero, or greater than zero, for all j and n.

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

249

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

We translate this behavioral condition into the sufficient model condition on ( j ) that ( j  1)( j ) must be nondecreasing (nonincreasing) in j for aggressive (unaggressive) bidders. By definition ( j  1) · ( j )  1 for neutrally aggressive bidders. As described in the technical appendix under "Definition and Properties of ( j )," a Bn who violates this condition has the inconsistent aggressiveness just described.
We do not assume that sellers always know n. Rather, we seek to show that aggressiveness affects their optimal strategies and E[U(pS)], making it worthwhile to estimate n. Sellers may be able to do so based on prior experience with bidders for particular kinds of property. Even if they cannot determine it precisely, we show that their optimal strategies differ based just on knowing whether n is positive or negative, since n's sign drives our basic model results.

The Optimal Discrete Reserve, vD* Before the auction, the seller first examines whether to
set vD at the first discrete level at or above v0, denoted v  I, or one increment higher, at v, where v  v¯. Rais-
ing vD has four possible, mutually exclusive, and exhaustive consequences: The property (a) sells at the same price  v with both reserves, (b) does not sell with either, (c) sells for v  I when vD  v  I, and sells for v when vD  v, and (d) sells for v  I when vD  v  I but does not sell when vD  v.
In (a) and (b), raising vD does not change E[U(pS)]. In (c), the seller gains by raising vD since revenue increases from v  I to v. Case (c) can happen via two events: If v(n)  v and v(n  1)  v  I, or, if v(n)  v and at least one other bidder has v  I  v(i)  v, but Bn would obtain the bid when vD  v  I. Only the latter event is affected by aggressiveness. Thus, the seller's
expected gain from raising vD, denoted q(v, v0, n), is (see proof of Proposition 1 in the technical appendix
for derivation):

q(, 0, n)  [U(  0)  U(  I  0)]

 1  F()
F()  F( 

I)

[Fn()



F n(



I)]

  nn[1  F()][Fn1()  Fn1 (  I)] , (1)

which increases with Bn's relative aggressiveness. In

(d) the seller loses by raising vD, and his revenue decreases from vI to v0. Thus, the seller's absolute expected loss from raising vD, denoted r(v, v0, n), is:
r(, 0, n)  U(  I  0) [Fn()  Fn(  I)], (2)
and does not depend on aggressiveness. If this analysis supports raising vD, the seller repeats it with v now one interval higher. Given any permissible vI, the seller should raise vD to v if q(v, v0, n)  r(v, v0, n), should not raise if q(v, v0, n)  r(v, v0, n), and is indifferent if q(v, v0, n)  r(v, v0, n). The optimal reserve, vD* , is the highest discrete bid v with q(v, v0, n)  r(v, v0, n), characterized as follows (see the technical appendix for proofs of propositions):
Proposition 1. There exists an optimal discrete bid reserve for the seller, v*D, such that:
a) If Bn is relatively more aggressive than other bidders, so n  0, then v*D has a minimum value equal to the optimal continuous bid reserve, v*C , increases with n, and can assume any higher discrete bid level  v¯ if n is large enough.
b) If Bn is relatively unaggressive, so n  0, then v*D has a maximum value of v*C, decreases as n increases, and can assume any lower discrete bid level  v0 if n is large enough.
c) If Bn has neutral aggressiveness, then v*D  v*C and does not depend on n.
d) For any n allowed, vD*  v0 and increases with v0, and vD* converges to vC* as I  0. For any given n, vD* increases as n increases. Further, when n  0, v*D decreases as the seller's absolute risk aversion increases.
We next show that Bn's aggressiveness affects E[U(pS)]:
Proposition 2. When the seller sets the discrete bid reserve at v*D, for any given n:
a) E[U(pS)] increases as Bn's relative aggressiveness decreases (as n decreases).
b) As n decreases (increases), this increases (decreases) the set of possible auctions, defined as combinations of F(v), v0, n, and I, where E[U(pS)] is higher with discrete than continuous bidding.
These results should prove useful to auction sellers. Proposition 1 identifies v*D, the optimal discrete reserve, and shows it depends on Bn's aggressiveness (n) and on n (unless n  0). Aggressiveness affects v*D due to outcomes where vD equals the highest bid level not

250

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

exceeding v(n1), and v(n) at least equals the next higher level. Here, for a given n, increasing n increases the probability Bn obtains the current bid at vD in competition against the j  1 remaining bidders. If Bn does not achieve this, she must bid one increment higher, increasing q(v, v0, n). However, the associated loss, r(v, v0, n), does not depend on n. Thus, v*D increases. Sellers require more information to set discrete than continuous reserves, since n and n affect v*D but not v*C.
E[U(pS)] increases as n decreases, for a given n, since it becomes more likely that Bn must pay v*D  I, as in Proposition 2a, and will not obtain the bid at v*D. Proposition 2b shows that the set of auctions where sellers are better off with discrete than with continuous bidding increases (decreases) as n decreases (increases) for a given n. This suggests that one explanation for the popularity of sizeable bid increments among sellers, beyond their more basic, operational ability to eliminate small, time-consuming raises, could be that many sellers may perceive (whether correctly or not) that Bn tends to be relatively unaggressive.

Contrast with Continuous Bidding. By contrast, v*C does not depend on n in OE auctions with continuous bidding, when IPV bidders draw vi from the same distribution (Matthews 1980, Riley and Samuelson 1981). This difference can be explained as follows. In both continuous and discrete auctions, the seller should continue increasing vD as long as:

absolute

loss



P(seller

gains

by

raising

reserve) .

(3)

gain

P(seller loses by raising reserve)

The ratio in the left-hand side of (3) does not change with n in either the continuous or discrete auction. In the continuous, the ratio in the right-hand side also does not change with n, so v*C does not change with n (see (A14) and subsequent discussion, in proof of Proposition 1d in the technical appendix, for this ratio's behavior as I  0). However, with discrete bidding, when n  ()0, the right-hand side ratio increases (decreases) unboundedly with n, even if I is very small (see proofs of Propositions 1a­1c in the technical appendix). This makes v*D increase (decrease) with n. It also implies that sellers require more information to set v*D than vC* , since they must know n and n. The numerical example in § 5 shows that although v*D can

remain constant for some successive values of n, when n  ()0, it eventually increases (decreases) as n increases further, and can be several increments higher (lower) than v*C. Thus, the impact of discrete bidding is not just to, at most, round v*C to the nearest higher (lower) discrete bid level--the effect can be greater. In the limit, as I  0, v*D converges to v*C, for all n, as in Proposition 1d. Thus, for any aggressiveness, when bid increments are small a seller could use v*C to approximate closely v*D.
3. Optimal Covert Shilling in Discrete Bid Auctions
Shilling occurs when the seller, or a confederate, covertly poses as a bona fide bidder and raises bona fide bids. A shilling seller accepts a bid when he stops raising and lets the item sell. Shilling is traditionally regarded as an unethical attempt by sellers to raise prices at bidders' expense. That shilling is a long-established practice, and continues today, is supported by comments from auction observers (Cassady 1967, pp. 212­ 13; Cicero 106­43 B.C., Book III, XV, on "a bogus bidder"; Smith 1989, pp. 151­55) and by discussions in legal references of laws prohibiting shilling (Corpus Juris Secundum 1980, §7­15), where shilling is probably the subject of more laws than any other auction practice. In a much-publicized 1993 case, the court refused to dismiss charges that a bank shilled in a real estate auction (Stormy Weathers Inc. v. FDIC, 834 F. Supp. 519; Hewett 1994). Shilling is also a problem in Internet auctions (Schwartz 1998). In January 1999, eBay, a popular Internet auction firm, announced new rules to combat shilling (Anders 1999). Subsequent investigations in the press, prompted by the suspicious sale of a highpriced painting, revealed the existence of Internet "shill rings" that were extremely difficult for most bidders to detect and that flourished despite the new rules (Dobrzynski 2000a). These revelations soon motivated the FBI to start a formal investigation of online shilling (Dobrzynski 2000b), and shortly afterwards, allegations of further shilling activities, this time in coin auctions, appeared in the press (Simpson 2000). Prosecutions of shilling are rare, however, suggesting much shilling remains undetected. As one observer comments, shilling "is not as common as many auction cynics would assert but more common than most auction houses would admit" (Smith 1989, p. 150).

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

251

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

Only a few auction models have examined shilling. Graham et al. (1990) analytically model the practice in continuous bid, OE auctions where sellers can determine when only one bidder remains. They contrast results when IPV bidders draw vi from the same versus different distributions. Rothkopf and Harstad (1995) examine bid-taker cheating where sellers submit false bids after the bona fide sealed bidding ends in Vickrey auctions. However, optimal shilling strategy for sellers has not been examined in the context of discrete bid, OE auctions.
Assumptions of the Shilling Model We modify the reserve model as follows:
The Seller. A seller using a covert shilling strategy is ready to reject bona fide bids by submitting covert shill bids, even if he eventually makes no shill bids. We assume the seller announces falsely that a private reserve is in effect and does not expect that bidders can detect shilling. We assume sellers who "buy back" their property while shilling will not reoffer it in the near future, since this can signal bidders that shilling occurred (also assumed by Graham et al. 1990). While we refer to the seller's shilling decisions, we assume the seller can use a covert agent(s) to shill, and that any auctioneer cooperates with the seller's shilling strategy.
Bona Fide Bidders' Optimal Bidding Strategy. We examine covert shilling, where bidders believe a reserve is in effect, do not anticipate or detect shilling, and perceive shill bids as bona fide. Thus, bidders use the same bidding strategy as with reserves--to bid up to and including the highest level not exceeding their vi. Because this strategy does not depend on n in an OE auction, it does not change with the addition of an apparent extra bidder(s) if shilling occurs.
We feel it is important to examine covert, rather than overt, shilling because we believe the former is more prevalent in actual auctions. Shilling is extremely difficult for bidders to detect. Although many auction bidders may be aware that shilling sometimes occurs, this does not necessarily imply that they believe shilling is occurring at the present auction, or can detect it, or attempt to adjust their bidding strategies accordingly. Furthermore, discussions of shilling in legal references and evidence from legal cases make clear that

laws exist to protect bidders from shills precisely because it is a practice carried out in secret, and that often bidders do not detect shilling while bidding in auctions where later they found out it had occurred.8 From a consumer protection perspective, bidders who do not detect or anticipate shilling are consumers legally entitled to trust the (in fact) false claims of shilling sellers or auctioneers that all bidders are bona fide. Thus, examining covert shilling allows us to assess shilling's full potential to injure consumer welfare, whereas examining overt or anticipated shilling cannot.
We could assume bidders always believe shilling may occur and modify their bidding accordingly. This creates an information symmetry with some appeal-- the seller may shill, the bidder knows this and acts accordingly, the seller knows that the bidder knows, etc. We are faced with a choice between assuming that in actual auctions most bidders expect and can detect shilling, or that in such auctions most bidders do not anticipate or detect shilling, as supported by legal evidence. We feel the latter occurs more frequently, making it a useful starting point for examining shilling. At the same time, we acknowledge that the former "savvy" bidders may exist, and even unsavvy bidders may detect clumsy shilling. Our model is not intended to cover these situations, some of which are examined in the discussion section.
To justify the assumption that bidders cannot detect shilling, our model requires that (1) shills must bid in a manner consistent with optimal bidding behavior for bona fide bidders in a reserve auction, and (2) the manner in which bona fide bidders' bids are recognized as the current bid, or rejected, must be outwardly identical to a reserve auction.
8Legal references supporting that lawmakers and courts assume shilling can be kept secret include "[the shill] is secured from risk [of paying] by a secret understanding with the seller"; "the secret employment, by the seller, of a puffer or by-bidder" (C.J.S. 1980, Sect. 7-15); "such secret arrangements are offensive to fair dealing" (Burdon v. Seitz, 267 S.W. 219). Legal references supporting that lawmakers and courts assume bona fide bidders do not anticipate or detect shilling include "Mr. Sowa [the bidder] says he was not aware, at the time [of the auction], that an agent of the owner was bidding against him" (Stormy Weathers Inc. v. FDIC, 834 F. Supp. 519, p. 521); "At that time [soon after the auction] he [the buyer] knew nothing of the fraud which had been perpetrated upon him" (Edmunds v. Gwynn, 161 S.E. 892).

252

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

The Seller's Decisions With Shilling We assume the seller or auctioneer allows bidding to proceed among bona fide bidders, without shilling, until no further raises occur. Instead of selling the property or bidding for the reserve, however, the auctioneer in a shilling auction covertly signals to any shill(s) that now they may start shilling. This should not arouse bidder suspicion, since auctioneers in reserve auctions often exchange confidential signals with secretive bidders. Moreover, in almost all OE auctions the auctioneer takes a few seconds to determine whether bidding is finished by searching for lastsecond bids. Thus, our shilling model does not require auctioneers to take any public actions or make any judgments that they would not make in a reserve auction.
Covert shilling also cannot allow shills to "steal" bona fide bids by quickly calling out the same bid just made by a bona fide bidder and obtaining the current bid. This is possible because most auction rules give auctioneers authority to determine the current bidder. However, deliberate attempts to ignore bona fide bidders are likely eventually to trigger shilling suspicions. For the same reason, we do not consider the wellknown "backup" practice where, if a shill bid is not followed by a bona fide raise, the auctioneer announces a "mistake" in recognizing an apparent bidder and declares that the previous, bona fide bidder still has the bid (Smith 1989, p. 151).
Let the random variable S0 denote the bid where bona fide bidding stops, with realized value s0. We assume s0  v0, since the seller rejects bids below v0. Once bidding stops the seller must decide whether to sell the property for s0, or reject s0 by entering the first shill bid, of s0  I (Graham et al. 1990 also assume shilling begins at this point). The first shill "fails" if no bona fide bidder raises it to s0  2I, so the property does not sell and U(pS)  0. The first shill "succeeds" if a bona fide bidder raises to s0  2I. Here, the seller must decide whether to stop shilling and accept that bid or shill again by bidding s0  3I. The process repeats until either a shill fails or the seller stops shilling. We define the "terminal shill" as the last shill bid, made at a level denoted st (st  s0  I), so the seller accepts bona fide bid st  I, if offered. To maximize E[U(pS)|s0], which is conditional on S0  s0, the seller using a shilling

strategy must decide (i) whether to shill even once when bona fide bidding stops, and (ii) if so, finding the optimal terminal shill, termed s*t .
The previous discussion assumes that shills raise bona fide bids by only one increment. For completeness, the technical appendix examines the more general case where shills can raise by one or more increments consecutively.9 However, since we show (proofs of Propositions 3a­3c in technical appendix) that optimal shilling does not depend on whether intermediate shill bids occur singly or successively, for brevity the text examines shills that raise bids by one increment, which reflects bidding in most auctions.
The Seller's Expected Utility from Ending Shilling at st, Given s0 The probability that ending shilling at st "succeeds" is the product of the probabilities of three events that must all occur: (i) v(n) is the only vi (here using vi as a generic valuation) in the bidding increment it occupies; (ii) the first shill succeeds, conditional on (i); (iii) any subsequent shills needed to reach st all succeed, conditional on (ii). The seller can calculate these probabilities from additional information on each bidder's vi that he obtains only from observing s0 (and cannot use in a reserve auction) as follows:
i) v(n) is the only vi in its increment. This probability is denoted P(v(n),only|s0). Bidding can stop at s0 due to any one of three exhaustive, mutually exclusive outcomes (enumerated in the technical appendix Equations (A1a)­(A1c)). First, v(n)  s0  I and at least one other bidder has s0  vi  s0  I, but Bn obtains the bid at s0. Second, only v(n)  s0, but at least one other bidder has s0  I  vi  s0 and one such bidder obtains the bid at s0  I, forcing Bn to bid s0. Third, v(n) and at least v(n1) share the same increment. The shill can possibly succeed in the first two cases, which happen if and only if v(n) is the only vi in its increment, but certainly fails in the third, because v(n)  s0  I.
9To covertly place two or more successive shill bids requires using two shills, who raise each other's bids in quick succession as often as necessary (they must prearrange who bids first). This allows each shill to raise by only one interval, which bona fide bidders will perceive as other bona fide bidders bidding quickly, which can occur in actual auctions.

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

253

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

Once s0 is known, the seller can compute each outcome's probability, conditional on S0  s0, and compute P(v(n),only|s0) as the ratio of the sum of the first two probabilities to that of all three. Only the first two
probabilities depend on Bn's relative aggressiveness (technical appendix Equations (A2a)­(A2c)). By ob-
serving s0, sellers know that at least one bidder has vi  s0, at least one other bidder (the previous current bidder) has s0  I  vi  s0  I, and the n  2 other bidders have v  vi  s0  I.
In continuous bid auctions, P(v(n),only | s0)  1 always; Bn can always raise any bona fide bid since v(n)  v(n1) strictly. However, with discrete bidding P(v(n),only | s0)  1 always (see technical appendix Lemma 6b), because the probability that v(n) and at least v(n1) are in the same increment, which can prevent Bn from placing the last bid, is strictly positive always. If the first shill succeeds, however, on all sub-
sequent shills it is certain only Bn remains bidding. ii) The probability the first shill succeeds if v(n),only
occurs. Equations (A17)­(A19) in the technical appendix derive this probability, denoted P(v(n)  s0  2I|v(n),only). This depends on v(n1), since the distribution of v(n) has lower support at v(n1). However, the seller does not know v(n1) when deciding whether to begin shilling, but knows only that s0  I  v(n1)  s0  I. If the first shill succeeds, the seller knows for certain that v(n)  s0  2I, so v(n1)'s value is no longer relevant to v(n)'s value.
iii) The probability the second through last shills
succeed if the first succeeds. If sj is the most recent successful shill bid, where j  1, the seller knows v(n)  sj  I. Thus, after each successful shill the seller revises the c.d.f. of v(n) as F(v) truncated on the left at sj  I and normalized to a probability of 1. Thus, the probability a subsequent shill bid of sk  sj  2I succeeds, conditional on the previous shill succeeding, is P(v(n)  sk  I|v(n)  sj  I), which is (1  F(sk  I))/(1  F(sj  I)).
Optimal Shilling Strategy. E[U(pS)|s0], the expected utility from ending shilling at st, given s0, can be expressed using the three probabilities in (i)
through (iii), as in the appendix (under sketch of proof
of Proposition 3). The seller maximizes E[U(pS)|s0], subject to the constraint that it must exceed U(pS) from

accepting s0 (see Equations (A21)­(A22) in the technical appendix). This leads to two propositions that together define optimal shilling. Proposition 3 describes optimal shilling if it is optimal to shill at least once, and Proposition 4 identifies cases where sellers using a shilling strategy should not shill even once, but instead accept s0.
Proposition 3. When the bona fide discrete bidding stops at s0  v0, if it is optimal for the seller to shill at least once, then:
a) There exists a unique value of s*t that maximizes the seller's expected utility from shilling, as defined in the technical appendix Equation (A24). If s0  s*t the seller should shill until reaching s*t as the last shill bid, and then accept a bid of s*t  I, if offered. This optimal shilling strategy can use any combination of shill bids as long as the last is s*t and does not depend on intermediate shill bids.
b) st* does not depend on s0, or Bn's relative aggressiveness, or n. It increases with v0, and decreases as the seller's absolute risk aversion increases.
c) st*  I can be higher or lower than the optimal discrete reserve, v*D, depending on n. Their relationship depends on Bn's aggressiveness and on n, and they are always equal only when n  0. When n  0 (n  0), v*D can be strictly greater (less) than s*t  I provided n is large enough. Moreover, st*  I  vC* , the optimal continuous reserve, provided vC* is a permitted discrete bid.
Proposition 3a shows that if optimally the seller shills at least once, optimal shilling can use any sequence of shill bids provided the last is s*t , so the lowest acceptable bid is s*t  I, regardless of the order of intermediate shill bids.10 Proposition 3b implies sellers can determine st* before the auction, and even without knowing n, since s0, n, and Bn's aggressiveness do not affect st*. An interesting question given shilling's reputation as a method to increase prices is whether the minimum acceptable bid with shilling always exceeds that with reserves. Proposition 3c shows that, provided the seller shills at least once, the minimum acceptable
10If s0  s*t and s*t  s0  kI where k is odd, the seller can obtain the bid at st* by submitting a single shill bid at s0  I and alternating single bids with Bn. If k is even, the seller is on the "wrong" shilling foot because this gives Bn the bid at s*t . To covertly get on the "right" shilling foot requires that two confederates shill in quick succession, as in footnote 9.

254

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

bid is not consistently higher or lower than v*D. This occurs because v*D increases with n, and can either increase or decrease with n (as per Propositions 1a and 1b). Proposition 3c also shows that s*t  I  v*C as long as the latter is a permissible bid, so that the lowest optimal discrete bid the seller accepts, provided he shills, is the same as the optimal continuous reserve. Next, we examine when sellers should not shill even once.
Proposition 4. When the seller uses a shilling strategy, and Bn is relatively less, or as aggressive, than other bidders, discrete bid auctions exist where the seller optimally should not shill even once but instead accept s0. These scenarios depend on s0, n, and n.
Proposition 4 shows that in some auctions U(pS) from accepting s0 exceeds E[U(pS)|s0] when shilling to st*, so the seller should not shill even once. These auctions can occur when Bn is relatively less aggressive, or as aggressive, than the other bidders. They occur because when n  0 and n increases, P(v(n),only|s0) monotonically decreases to a lower bound greater than zero, which lowers the probability that the first shill succeeds. This lowers E[U(pS)] from shilling to s*t . At some sufficiently large n, the seller's certain utility from accepting s0 exceeds E[U(pS)|s0] from shilling to st*. Note that when n  0, P(v (n),only|s0) is not monotonic w.r.t. n, so Proposition 4 does not address this case. Propositions 3 and 4 together imply that the optimal lowest acceptable bid with shilling, however, is either s0 or s*t  I, and never a bid between them.
Contrast with Continuous Bid Auctions. By contrast, in continuous bid auctions (i.e., the case of homogeneous distribution bidders in Graham et al. 1990), the seller should always shill to the same optimal stopping point provided it exceeds s0, and this point does not depend on n or s0. The discrete and continuous results differ because once s0 is known, the seller in the continuous auction knows v(n1), the lower support of v(n), and that P(v(n),only|s0)  1, which also implies that Bn has the current bid (Graham et al. 1990), regardless of s0 or n. However, at this point the seller in the discrete auction still does not know v(n1) with certainty, but does know that P(v(n),only|s0)  1. Both of these terms' values depend on s0, n, and n, which in some

cases make the seller worse off if he shills even once. If the first shill succeeds, however, the discrete bid seller knows the lower support of v(n) with certainty and that only Bn remains. Thus, in discrete auctions the decision whether to shill even once depends upon s0, n, and aggressiveness, but st* does not.
Comparing Information and Implementation Demands of Shilling and Reserves. Propositions 3 and 4 imply that optimal shilling does not require discrete bid sellers to have information beyond that needed to set optimal reserves, except observing s0, which they must also do in a reserve auction to declare bidding ended. Sellers in both auctions must know n, F(v), v0, and n. This means shilling is not more demanding than reserves from an information perspective.
Optimal shilling is also reasonably practical to implement for the following reasons. Before the auction the seller can calculate st* and determine, for each possible s0, whether it is optimal to shill to st* or accept s0. The seller can summarize these decisions into a fairly simple "shilling schedule," and give it to any shilling confederates before the auction. These need only state st* for the entire auction and, for each possible s0, whether to shill to st* or accept s0. Neither the seller nor confederates need make any complicated decisions or calculations under time pressure during the auction, which would reduce shilling's practicality. Thus, our results do not preclude that shilling represents a reasonably practical strategy for sellers to implement at many actual auctions. As mentioned earlier, our shilling model does not reflect all possible factors that may arise in auctions, which may create additional information or implementation demands.
4. Impact of Reserves and Shilling on Seller's and Bidders' Welfare
Given shilling's disrepute as benefitting sellers at bidders' expense, it is useful to examine how it affects both parties' expected auction utility compared with using reserves:
Proposition 5. In a discrete bid, open English auction: a) Optimal shilling always gives the seller an expected utility either (i) higher or (ii) the same as with the optimal

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

255

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

reserve. The latter occurs only if s*t  I  v*D, and if optimally the seller shills for every possible s0  s*t .
b) Auctions exist where bidders earn higher expected utility when the seller shills optimally rather than using the optimal reserve. In these, shilling Pareto dominates reserves, ex ante. Such auctions occur when, for some n, (i) s*t  I  vD* , which can occur in auctions where Bn is relatively aggressive (n  0), or (ii) s*t  I  v*D and the seller does not shill for at least one s0  s*t , which Proposition 4 posits can occur for an unaggressive or neutral Bn (n  0). When shilling is not Pareto dominant, bidders are as well off, or worse off, than with a reserve.
Proposition 5a holds because shilling sellers can observe s0 before determining the lowest acceptable bid. This information is not available before the auction, when the reserve is set, but can increase E[U(pS)]. IPV bidders in OE auctions do not change their highest optimal bid when observing bidding, however (Harris and Raviv 1981, Myerson 1981, Riley and Samuelson 1981, Vickrey 1961). Because shilling does not constrain which bids sellers can accept or reject, compared with reserves, and sellers can change actions upon observing s0 but bidders will not, this information cannot make sellers worse off, by Blackwell's Theorem (Blackwell 1951). Furthermore, shilling does not change E[U(pS)] if s*t  I  v*D, and optimal shilling, for all s0  s*t , is shill to s*t .
Whereas shilling can make bidders worse off compared to reserves, Proposition 5b also shows that auctions exist where it makes bidders better off, in which case shilling Pareto dominates reserves. These occur when the shilling seller accepts some bids below v*D (but exceeding v0), as in Proposition 5b, i, and ii. If the seller shills, these bids are at least s*t  I but still less than vD* . This can be optimal when Bn  0, since increased aggressiveness causes v*D to increase and to increase with n (but s*t remains unchanged). If the seller decides not to shill, which we show can occur when n  0 (while not ruling this out when n  0), these bids are s0  v*D (Proposition 5bii). In both cases, the winning bidder's expected payment is lowered if the property sells, compared with reserves. Here, shilling also lowers the probability the property does not sell, which gives all bidders zero surplus. These factors together make bidders better off. Meanwhile, because in

all such auctions the shilling seller accepts bids lower than v*D, the seller is better off (by Proposition 5a).
Contrast with Continuous Bid Auctions. With continuous bidding, by contrast, shilling and reserves always yield the same welfare for bidders and sellers, since both yield the same optimal lowest acceptable bid (i.e., a homogeneous bidder distribution in Graham et al. 1990). That shilling can increase E[U(pS)] will tend to increase its attraction to sellers in discrete bid auctions.11
5. Numerical Examples to Illustrate Propositions
These examples are intended to describe discrete bid auctions within the range of parameter values often encountered in actual practice, but are not comprehensive. They examine a risk-neutral seller with 2  n  40, and v0  $2,000 or $4,000. The f(v) are beta distributions scaled to have range [$1,000, $10,000]. Two unimodal f(v) are used for reserve examples and two for shilling. In each pair, one f(v) is close to symmetric, and the other has a longer right tail. We choose I  $500, an increment often specified at art and antiques auctions when bids are between $5,000 and $10,000, and I  $100 to represent smaller increments used in many corresponding Internet auctions.
Bn's relative aggressiveness is represented by an exponent, c, on the neutral bid probability--( j ) takes the form: [1/( j  1)]c. Here, n depends on n. We use c  0.4 for a relatively aggressive Bn (thus, n  0), c  3 for an unaggressive Bn (n  0), and c  1 for neutral aggressiveness (n  0).
These f(v) are designed to place v*C on a discrete bid level. This creates a very conservative test for the seller's utility advantages of using v*D instead of v*C, since v*C is now a permissible discrete bid level. This
11While shilling can increase sellers' expected utility with continuous bidding when IPV bidders draw valuations from different distributions, this occurs only if the seller knows each distribution and the number of bidders drawing valuations from each (Graham et al. 1990). Such sellers must have considerably more information than in the discrete bid auctions where shilling increases their welfare, where bidders draw valuations from the same distribution.

256

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

constraint prevents f(v) from exact symmetry and re-
quires changing its parameters when v0 changes.
Reserve Strategy. Table 1 illustrates how v*D depends on n and n (Proposition 1). For example, with the "symmetric" f(v), when Bn is unaggressive and I  $500, vD* decreases with n, so that while vC*  $6,000, vD*  $6,000 when n  5, vD*  $5,500 when 6  n  13, and vD*  $5,000 when 14  n  40. When Bn is aggressive, v*D increases with n, so that vD*  $6,000 when n  9, v*D  $6,500 when 10  n  36, and vD*  $7,000 when 37  n  40. These changes in v*D also occur when I  $100 and for the right-skewed f(v).
Shilling Strategy. Table 2 illustrates results from
Propositions 3­5 for particular s0. These alternate v0 between $2,000 and $4,000 to illustrate how shilling
becomes less attractive to sellers as v0 decreases, which increases the cost of failed shills. Note s*t does not depend on n, or aggressiveness, or s0 (Proposition 3). For both f(v) here, instances exist where the seller who is
prepared to shill to st* should instead accept s0 (Proposition 4).
Consider the right-tailed f(v), when v0  $2,000, Bn is unaggressive, and I  $500. Here, s*t  $3,500, and the seller does not shill when s0  $3,000 if n  9, or when s0  $2,500 if n  13. If Bn has neutral aggressiveness, the seller always shills when I  $500 and s0  $3,000, and never shills when I  $100 and s0  $3,800 (in the latter case st*  $3,900). For some examples the seller always shills, or never shills, regard-
less of n, whereas for others this depends on n. We
include an aggressive Bn for completeness, although Proposition 4 does not address such bidders.
These examples contain both instances in Proposi-
tion 5bi­ii where shilling Pareto dominates reserves,
evident from comparing v*D from Table 1 with st* from Table 2. One is the result in 5bi, where s*t  I  v*D which occurs for the "symmetric" f(v) when Bn is aggressive and I  $100 or $500, if n is sufficiently large. The other is that in 5bii, where st*  I  vD* and shilling is not optimal for at least one s0  s*t which occurs for the "symmetric" f(v) and I  $100 when c  3 and 2  n  5, when c  1 for all n, and when c  0.4 and 2  n  8. However, the examples also include instances where s*t  I  v*D and the seller shills, which makes sellers better off but bidders worse off, e.g., I 

$500 and c  3, for "symmetric" f(v). Here, shilling does not Pareto dominate a reserve strategy.
Impact on Seller's Utility. Table 1 compares E[U(pS)] at v*D (termed Strategy D for "discrete"), for illustrative values of n, with two other reserve strategies: Strategy N (for "null") sets vD*  v0, which is a useful comparison reference since it is intuitively obvious and simple, requiring no normative auction theory and Strategy C (for "continuous") sets v*D  v*C, and uses existing continuous bid theory. Hence, (E[U(pS)]C  E[U(pS)]N) indicates how much strategies from existing continuous bid models increase the seller's welfare compared to the "null" strategy, and (E[U(pS)]D  E[U(pS)]N) compares our discrete bid models with the "null." The ratio of these differences, (E[U(pS)]D  E[U(pS)]N)/(E[U(pS)]C  E[U(pS)]N), creates a useful "improvement ratio" for the optimal discrete strategy.
For the "symmetric" f(v), when Bn is relatively unaggressive, I  $500, and n  8 (where v*D  v*C), this ratio is 1.98. When Bn is relatively aggressive and n  12 or 15 (both cases where v*D  v*C), this ratio is 1.21 and 1.66, respectively.
The bottom of Table 1 illustrates how E[U(pS)] increases as n decreases (Proposition 2), for n  5, 10, and 15. For example, with the right-tailed f(v), I  $500, and n  10, E[U(pS)]  $1,927.20 in a discrete auction when Bn is relatively aggressive, increases to $2,001 when neutrally aggressive, and increases further to $2,102.50 when unaggressive. These values of E[U(pS)] are also compared with E[U(pS)] from continuous bid auctions (as modeled succinctly in Matthews 1980). Whereas for a given n continuous bidding generates higher E[U(pS)] than discrete when Bn is aggressive, and slightly higher when Bn has neutral aggressiveness, discrete bidding generates higher E[U(pS)] when Bn is unaggressive. Aggressiveness' impact is less when I  $100.
For shilling, Table 2 compares E[U(pS) | s0] when the seller always shills to st*, with the certain U(pS) from accepting s0. (Note E[U(pS) | s0] here is conditional on s0, and so not comparable to E[U(pS)] in Table 1.) For example, with the right-tailed f(v), when s0  $3,000, Bn is relatively unaggressive, and I  $500, the seller earns $1,000 for certain by accepting s0. It is, however,

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

257

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

Table 1 Numerical Examples for Discrete Bid Reserve

Distribution 1: Right-tailed

Distribution 2: Close to Symmetric

Bn's Aggressiveness

Unaggressive (c  3)

Neutral (c  1)

Aggressive (c  0.4)

Unaggressive (c  3)

Neutral (c  1)

Aggressive (c  0.4)

I 0 C* n for which D*  *C  2 I C*  I C* C*  I C*  2 I

500 4000 5500

100 4000 5500

500 4000 5500

100 4000 5500

500 4000 5500

100 4000 5500

500 4000 6000

100 4000 6000

500 4000 6000

100 4000 6000

500 4000 6000

100 4000 6000

20 to 40 21 to 40

9 to 19 8 to 20

2 to 8 2 to 7 all n all n

--

--

--

--

--

--

14 to 40 15 to 40

--

--

6 to 13 6 to 14

2 to 13 2 to 11 2 to 5 2 to 5 all n all n

14 to 40 12 to 34 --

--

Note 4 35 to 40 --

--

-- -- 2 to 9 10 to 36 37 to 40

-- -- 2 to 8 9 to 23 24 to 40

E[U(pS)], with reserve at n

*D  *C  I

9

8

0

1960.1 1726.9

C*

1979.3 1800.9

D*

1981.9 1800.9

Improvement Ratio

1.14

1.00

*D  *C  I

14

12

2229.5 2164.7

2263

2194.5

2263.6 2194.5

1.02

1.00

D*  *C  I

6

6

2478.7 2385.6

2520.1 2465.7

2521

2465.7

1.02

1.00

D*  *C  I

10

9

2948.2 2921

2978.5 2946.4

2979.4 2946.5

1.03

1.00

n 0 C* D* Improvement Ratio

11 2202.5 2205 2210.6
3.24

10 2007.4 2043.3 2043.7
1.01

16 2373.6 2394.6 2397.8
1.15

14 2339.4 2356 2356.2
1.01

8 2905.3 2910.4 2915.4
1.98

8 2819.1 2846 2846.3
1.01

12 3171.7 3186.2 3189.3
1.21

11 3178.8 3189.3 3189.4
1.01

n 0 C* D* Improvement Ratio

14 2474 2470.2 2475.7
Note 5

13 2316.7 2328.4 2328.9
1.04

19 2550.1 2560.6 2565.5
1.47

17 2547.5 2554.6 2554.8
1.03

11 3315.4 3312.2 3316.3
Note 5

11 3239.2 3244.3 3244.6
1.06

15 3420.7 3425.7 3429
1.66

14 3458.7 3461.7 3461.8
1.03

E[U(pS)]|*D n  5 (Discrete) (Continuous bidding) n  10 (Discrete) (Continuous bidding) n  15 (Discrete) (Continuous bidding)

1348.7 1310.7 2102.5 2019.4 2548.8 2450.3

1321.7 
2043.7 
2480.8 

1302.9 1310.4 1270







2001 2018.7 1927.2







2425.3 2449.3 2333.3







1302.6 
2001.4 
2427.5 

2269.6 2205.4 3201.3 3098.5 3658.6 3560.7

2223.4 
3129.1 
3593.8 

2192.8 2204.9 2137.1







3073.6 3097.5 2979.4







3529.2 3559.5 3429







2192 
3075.7 
3535.3 

Note 1:   $1,000; ¯  $10,000 Note 2: Distribution 1 is based on Beta(2, 3.65); Distribution 2 is based on Beta(2, 2.46). Note 3: Computations were performed for n from 2 to 40. Note 4: Not found for n from 2 to 40. Note 5: In these instances using *C rather than 0 produces lower utility, due to discrete bidding.

258

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

Table 2 Numerical Examples for Discrete Bid Shilling

Distribution 1: Right-tailed

Bn's Aggressiveness Unaggressive (c  3)

I

500

100

0

2000

2000

C*

4000

4000

s*t

3500

3900

Neutral (c  1)

500 2000 4000
3500

100 2000 4000
3900

Aggressive (c  0.4)

500 2000 4000
3500

100 2000 4000
3900

Distribution 2: Close to Symmetric

Unaggressive (c  3)

Neutral (c  1)

Aggressive (c  0.4)

500 4000 6000
5500

100 4000 6000
5900

500 4000 6000
5500

100 4000 6000
5900

500 4000 6000
5500

100 4000 6000
5900

s0 n (shill) n (not shill) U(pS)|not shill,s0 (n)E[U(pS)]|shill,s0   
s0 n (shill) n (not shill) U(pS)|not shill,s0 (n)E[U(pS)]|shill,s0   

3000 2 to 8 9 to 40 1000

3800 none 2 to 40 1800

3000 2 to 40 none 1000

3800 none 2 to 40 1800

3000 2 to 40 none 1000

3800 29 to 40 2 to 28
1800

5000 2 to 16 17 to 40 1000

5800 none 2 to 40 1800

5000 2 to 40 none 1000

5800 none 2 to 40 1800

5000 2 to 40 none 1000

5800 46 2 to 45 1800

(5) 1178.16 (5) 1792.51 (5) 1242.53 (5) 1793.68 (5) 1249.87 (5) 1793.69 (10) 1155.48 (5) 1793.88 (5) 1242.41 (5) 1794.13 (5) 1243.03 (10) 1794.23

(7) 1096.90 (10) 1788.28 (10) 1245.98 (10) 1793.79 (10) 1309.18 (12) 1794.42 (15) 1040.93 (10) 1791.68 (10) 1244.66 (10) 1794.15 (10) 1260.24 (25) 1795.65 (11) 867.35 (15) 1783.07 (15) 1251.37 (15) 1794.01 (15) 1368.3 (25) 1798.52 (20) 891.60 (15) 1789.20 (15) 1246.94 (15) 1794.23 (15) 1291.01 (40) 1798.63 (14) 676.61 (20) 1776.71 (2) 1259.05 (20) 1794.32 (20) 1409.24 (40) 1806.6 (30) 572.80 (20) 1786.40 (20) 1248.87 (20) 1794.35 (20) 1324.97 (60) 1804.54

2500 2 to 12 13 to 40
500

3700 2 to 17 18 to 40 1700

2500 2 to 40 none
500

3700 2 to 40 none 1700

2500 2 to 40 none
500

3700 2 to 40 none 1700

(7) 852.37 (5) 1711.97 (5) 1068.26 (5) 1713.25 (5) 1082.67 (5) 1713.26

(11) 567.83 (12) 1705.76 (10) 1072.98 (10) 1713.37 (10) 1144.97 (10) 1713.71 (15) 339.31 (20) 1695.93 (15) 1080.93 (15) 1713.60 (15) 1186.6 (15) 1714.73 (20) 183.89 (30) 1678.38 (20) 1087.88 (20) 1713.91 (20) 1209.87 (20) 1716.29

4500 2 to 25 26 to 40
500

5700 2 to 29 29 to 40 1700

4500 2 to 40 none
500

5700 2 to 40 none 1700

4500 2 to 40 none
500

5700 2 to 40 none 1700

(10) 960.78 (10) 1711.60 (5) 1058.57 (5) 1714.05 (5) 1060.01 (5) 1714.04

(20) 676.05 (25) 1703.33 (10) 1060.80 (10) 1714.08 (10) 1079.52 (10) 1714.16 (30) 382.86 (35) 1695.89 (15) 1062.71 (15) 1714.16 (15) 1108.98 (15) 1714.46 (35) 280.59 (40) 1691.48 (20) 1064.84 (20) 1714.27 (20) 1137.27 (20) 1714.94

Note 1:   $1,000; ¯  $10,000 Note 2: Distribution 1 is based Beta(2, 4.16); Distribution 2 is based on Beta(2, 2.46). Note 3: Computations performed for n from 2 to 40, except in one case.

259

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

optimal to shill if n  5, since E[U(pS) | s0]  $1,178.16, or if n  7, since E[U(pS) | s0]  $1,096.90, but not if n  11, where E[U(pS) | s0]  $867.35, or if n  14, where E[U(pS) | s0]  $676.61. The benefits of shilling are greater when I  $500 than when I  $100.
The propositions do not address the magnitude of utility comparisons in these examples, which cannot be generalized to all auctions. It is useful, however, to discuss some observations from these example auctions. For instance, the impact of Bn's relative aggressiveness on E[U(pS)] with reserves is, on average, considerably larger than the impact of identifying the optimal reserve. This suggests it is worthwhile to include aggressiveness in discrete bid models and for sellers to try to estimate aggressiveness.
The improvement ratio from using v*D instead of v*C is often 1.2 or 1.3 in Table 1, and reaches 3.24. This suggests that "returns" from using a discrete model in discrete bid auctions, instead of relying on continuous bid results, often exceed 20%. The magnitude of these increases is often quite small. However, the continuous bid models, which have received much attention in the auction literature, also generate values of E[U(pS)] only slightly higher than the "null" model. Thus, the discrete bid models do make a substantive difference in the seller's welfare when judged by the same standards that have been applied to existing continuous auction models. For these examples, furthermore, the difference (E[U(pS)]C  E[U(pS)]N) consistently gets smaller as n increases, whereas (E[U(pS)]D  E[U(pS)]C) either increases or stays about the same.
Whether these differences in E[U(pS)] are useful depends on the seller. In many stock and bond operations, new approaches that increase annual returns by even a few hundredths of a percent are considered quite valuable. The returns from using the optimal shilling strategy are more substantial than for reserves. For shilling, there is no simple and obvious "null" model analogous to setting vD  v0. However, Table 2 does show that shilling optimally can increase E[U(pS)] substantially, be this to shill or accept s0.
6. Discussion
We have shown that discrete bid rules and variations in relative bidder aggressiveness that can occur with

discrete bidding substantially alter sellers' optimal reserve and shilling strategies compared with continuous bidding. Furthermore, the decision of whether to use a reserve or shill and the level of Bn's relative aggressiveness can have a large impact on E[U(pS)] with discrete bidding. Auction practitioners, particularly sellers, can use the models we propose to gain insights into the nature of these strategy and utility changes, to predict when they occur, and determine how optimal strategies change directionally with other auction factors. Although sellers sometimes may have difficulty estimating all of these factors, such as aggressiveness, our results indicate that they do need to be concerned about aggressiveness and try to gather relevant information.
Relaxing the Covert Shilling Assumption. Before the auction, all bidders could believe the seller might shill, definitely will shill, or could have varying beliefs. During the auction even trusting bidders might detect clumsy shilling. Bidders suspicious of shilling might refuse to attend auctions where they believe it might occur, or attend but cease bidding if they detect shilling, or reduce their maximum bid to below its "trusting" level. As a last resort, they might try to estimate st* and immediately bid that amount if shilling is optimal in an attempt to save one increment in the final price since the seller will not bid s*t  I.
However, bidders will encounter informational and welfare obstacles to implementing these responses to shilling, which reduces their usefulness. First, refusing to attend, or ceasing bidding, denies them the chance to earn a positive expected auction surplus, instead of zero. Second, shilling sometimes makes bidders better off, and bidders cannot determine this for a particular auction without knowing the seller's v0 and utility function, which affect st* and whether the seller shills or accepts s0. Yet bidders typically do not have either information, and their prior beliefs about it may be in error. The number of bidders also affects their optimal response, since bidders are better off in many shilling auctions when n increases beyond a point, and the seller should not shill. Third, bidders who suspect shilling can reduce their bids, whereas bidders with no such suspicions will not. Here, the suspicious bidders risk reducing bids excessively, and consequently los-

260

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

ing to bona fide bidders rather than shills, while they still would have earned positive surplus with a higher bid.
Occasionally, a shilling seller can obtain information on bidders' valuations from indiscreet bidder behavior unrelated to bid amounts (such as telling a companion "I really want that teacup--I own the matching saucer"). The possibility of shilling implies that in auctions where covert shilling allows sellers (but not bidders) to gain, bidders have an extra incentive to keep their valuations private and not inadvertently to signal valuation information with indiscreet behavior. Neither our model nor any model that assumes bidders' valuations are private covers such behavior.
Auctions with a Common Value Component. Our reserve model does not apply to discrete bid auctions where bidders have common or "affiliated" bidder valuations (Milgrom and Weber 1982). For such bidders, but not for IPV bidders, optimal continuous reserves can depend on n (see also McAfee and McMillan 1987, p. 722). We expect that optimal shilling in such auctions will also differ from our IPV results. Covert shill bids will tend to increase these bidders' valuations, which increase as others bid higher. This can make bidders worse off. Sellers in such auctions may be more likely to shill if they observe that some peoples' bids depend on what others are bidding, which reveals them as common value bidders. On the other hand, cases may still arise when sellers accept s0 and do not shill, which makes the bidders better off with shilling than reserves. Consequently, the overall impact of discrete bidding on optimal reserve and shilling strategies, and participants' welfare, when valuations have a common value component, is not immediately clear.
Bid Probability that Depends on n. Our model assumes Bn's bid probability (·) depends only on j, the number of other remaining bidders, and not on n, the number of bidders participating at the auction's beginning. Furthermore, our model assumes, as do most models with IPV bidders, that bidders need not know n. It is possible that some bidders' (·) might depend on n as well as j. For example, in a crowded auction

room Bn might become more aggressive, or intimidated and less aggressive. Our model does not cover this situation.
Auctioneer's Cooperation and Commission. Auctioneers can volunteer different levels of cooperation with shilling, such as forgiving or collecting commissions on property bought with shill bids, or stopping auctions if they detect shilling. Shilling becomes less profitable to sellers as this cooperation decreases. However, even the most cooperative auctioneer's optimal shilling strategy might differ from the seller's if the auctioneer receives a commission only for sold property. In this case the auctioneer's optimal reserve may differ from the seller's and is likely to be less. Thus, for both reserves and shilling, future research may wish to examine equilibria as sellers and commission auctioneers negotiate strategies in discrete bid auctions.
Internet Auctions. Our model's assumptions must be modified to reflect rules and practices peculiar to Internet auctions. Many such services display e-mail addresses for all bidders and report how many times each bids. After bidding closes each bidder's maximum bid is often displayed. To shill covertly and not be detected afterwards, an Internet seller needs a larger set of confederates to submit shill bids from various e-mail addresses. Shills who regularly submit bids within seconds of each other, to obtain the correct shilling "foot," could also be revealed by this public information. Thus, a model of covert Internet shilling could not allow this practice. However, we do not expect that changing the model to reflect Internet bidding would change our model's basic results regarding the optimal point at which to stop shilling, whether to shill, the impact of aggressiveness, and the impact on sellers' and bidders' welfare. Internet bidders can also choose to be extremely aggressive by allowing the Internet service to automatically raise bids up to a specified maximum, an option available in many live auctions.
Internet auctions usually indicate that the current bid is below the reserve rather than having an electronic auctioneer raise bids. However, our model's basic results for discrete reserves should still apply to such Internet auctions, especially the dependence on aggressiveness and n.

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

261

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

Internet auction increments, typically between 1% and 5% of a current bid, are smaller than in most live auctions. One explanation is that because most Internet auctions take several days and participants can bid at any time, smaller increments do not increase bidders' time costs as they would in live auctions (Rothkopf and Harstad 1994b). Furthermore, many Internet auctions feature standardized items available in large quantities, such as baseball cards, toys, or coins. These usually trade within small price ranges, requiring smaller increments to make a market (just as stock shares have for years traded with very small increments of $1/32, which is 0.0625% of the price of a $50 share). By contrast, articles in Internet art auctions are often unique and trade over a much larger price range, and many such auctions do use larger increments. Further research may examine how uncertainty or fluctuation in objects' values affect the increments used in auctions that sell them.12
Appendix
This appendix defines the bid probability function (·), and describes its properties. It also contains sketches of the proofs of Lemmas 1­6, Propositions 1­4, and a formal proof of Proposition 5. The complete proofs are contained in a technical appendix for this article, located on the Marketing Science website, at http://mktsci.pubs. informs.org. It is also available from the authors.
All variables and functions are real valued.
Assumption 1. f(v)/(1-F(v)) is strictly monotonically increasing in v (see footnote 4 for discussion).
Definition 1. The set of permitted discrete bids is   {sa,sa  I, . . . ,sa  KI}, with integer K  2, and sa  KI  v¯.
Definition and Properties of (·) Here, we define (·) formally, based on the discussion of bidding aggressiveness in the text (§2). The "bid probability" is the probability that Bn obtains the current bid when j other bidders also remain. The bid probability for Bn is denoted by ( j )|Aggressive, or ( j )|Neutral, or ( j )|Unaggressive, depending on whether Bn is relatively aggressive, neutral, or unaggressive. Note that (·) is a function of j and some other parameter. The latter directly represents aggressiveness in any functional form appropriate for (·).
12The authors would like to thank Sushil Bikhchandani, Donald G. Morrison, Ambar G. Rao, Rahul Roy and Tirthankar Roy for comments on earlier versions of this paper, and extend their gratitude to three anonymous Marketing Science reviewers and the Area Editor for many useful suggestions and criticisms. Both authors contributed equally to this paper.

We require that (·) satisfy the following three properties: (a) For any given j, ( j )|Aggressive  ( j )|Neutral  ( j )|Unaggressive, with the inequalities being strict; and that ( j ) strictly increases with aggressiveness, regardless of the type of aggressiveness. Note ( j )|Neutral  1/( j  1). (b) ( j  1)( j ) is nondecreasing in j for an aggressive Bn, nonincreasing in j for an unaggressive Bn, and constant in j for a neutral Bn, for all j corresponding to all n. This sufficient condition ensures that for each bidder, ( j )  1/( j 1) is always either  0, or  0, or  0, for all j. Also, note that different bidders are allowed to have different types of aggressiveness. (c) ( j ) is not a constant in j for aggressiveness, neutrality, or unaggressiveness, for all j. It follows from properties (a) and (c) that ( j ) is a monotonic function of the parameter directly representing aggressiveness, for a given j. For example, c is that parameter in the numerical examples in the text's §5. Because the proofs do not require that parameter explicitly, it does not appear as an argument in (·).
Property (a) follows from the definition that higher aggressiveness increases Bn's bid probability, ( j ), ceteris paribus. The justification for property (c) has been discussed in the text (§2). Property (b) ensures that Bn has consistent aggressiveness, and does not "switch" from one type of aggressiveness to another as j changes. The technical appendix contains the proof that violating property (b) contradicts property (a). Please note that property (b) implies that our model does not describe auctions where individual bidders' aggressiveness can "switch."
Next, we state all lemmas together for ease of reference when reading the proofs.

Lemma 1. (n Fn1(v)/(Fn(v)  Fn(v  I)) strictly increases as n increases and is unbounded.

Lemma 2. (n Fn1(v  I))/(Fn(v)  Fn(v  I)) strictly decreases as n increases and has a minimum  0.

Lemma 3. U(v  I  v0)/(U(v  v0)  U(v  I  v0)) strictly increases as v increases.

Lemma 4. U(v  I  v0)/(U(v  v0)  U(v  I  v0)) increases as the seller's absolute risk aversion increases.

Lemma 5. (1  F(v))/(F(v)  F(v  I)) strictly decreases as v increases.

Lemma 6. (a) P(v(n),only) decreases as n increases if n  0, provided

  n 

log F(s0  I)

1
;

F(s0)

and is not necessarily monotonic if n  0. (b) P(v(n),only) lies strictly between 0 and 1.

Sketch of Proofs of Lemmas. For Lemmas 1 and 2, we rewrite the expressions using the term A, where A  F(v)/F(v I), and then apply real analysis and calculus to get the results. The proof of Lemma 3 compares how the numerator and the denominator change with v. The proof of Lemma 4 uses the definition of absolute risk aversion (from Pratt 1964, Theorem 1). The proof of Lemma 5 is shown by differentiating w.r.t. v and invoking Assumption 1. Note that Assumption 1 thus becomes a limiting assumption for when

262

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

Lemma 5 is true. As noted in footnote 4, this assumption is satisfied by several distributions and has been widely used in the literature. For Lemma 6a, we first enumerate the probabilities of the three mutually exclusive and exhaustive ways that bidding can stop at s0. This allows us to derive the expression for P(v(n),only|s0) for each of the three kinds of aggressiveness. The proof then examines separate subcases for each kind of dependence between n and n and for each kind of aggressiveness. The proof also requires that the three properties of , as discussed earlier, hold. The proof of Lemma 6b shows that each of the three possible outcomes always has a strictly positive chance of occurring.
Sketch of Proof of Proposition 1. We show v*D exists and is unique because the gain and loss functions from raising the reserve, which are q and r in text Equations (1) and (2), always cross, and at only one point, over the range of the reserve. To prove the remainder of Proposition 1a­c, we start with a relatively aggressive Bn, so that n  0. To show that vD* increases with n, we must examine separate subcases where n is nondecreasing in n versus strictly increasing in n. We then show for each subcase that as n increases, q and r can remain equal only if the reserve is eventually increased by a bidding increment and that as n continues to increase, v*D eventually reaches v¯ I. We do this by isolating the impact of n on the equality q  r, and show that when n  0 and n is increased, the least upper bound at which q  r is v¯ I. We use parallel reasoning to show that if Bn is relatively unaggressive (n  0), then v*D decreases with n down to v0.
To show that vD* increases with v0, we show that the gain q is strictly monotonically increasing, and the loss r is strictly monotonically decreasing, w.r.t. v0. Consequently the reserve when q  r will increase with v0. To show that v*D increases with Bn's relative aggressiveness for a given n, we use the fact that the gain q increases with aggressiveness, whereas the loss r does not depend on aggressiveness. To show that v*D approaches vC* as I approaches 0 for all n, we use real analysis and compare the result with v*C as derived by Matthews (1980). To show that v*D decreases as the seller becomes more risk averse, but only for n  0, we show how making the seller more risk averse lowers the reserve at which q  r, provided n  0.
Sketch of Proof of Proposition 2. To show that E[U(pS)] at vD* increases as Bn's relative aggressiveness decreases, we first formulate E[U(pS)] in a discrete auction with a reserve. This has not been done in the extant literature. We show that a discrete bid auction with a reserve has three mutually exclusive and exhaustive outcomes:
(i) The item does not sell. This happens if and only if v(n)  v*D, with probability PI  Fn(v*D). This implies that pS  0.
(ii) The item can sell at v*D, in three mutually exclusive and exhaustive ways:
(a) Only Bn's value is v*D. With "correct foot" bidding for the reserve, the item sells at vD* . The probability of this event is: PII,a  (n1) [1  F(D* )] Fn1(*D). (b) j ( j  2) bidders have vD*  vi  vD*  I, but none has vi  vD*  I.

   n
PII,b  j2

n j

[F(D*  I)  F(*D)] j F nj(*D).

(c) Only Bn's value is  vD*  I, and at least one of the (n  1) remaining bidders has vD*  vi  vD*  I, and Bn has bid at v*D.

     n1

PII,c 

n[1  F(*D  I)]

j1

j

1 

1



n

n1 j

[F(*D  I)  F(*D)] j Fn1j(*D).

(iii) The item sells for above the reserve because of competitive bidding. This happens in three ways for each bid level vD*  kI  v¯, for k  1, . . . , M; where M is the number of possible bid levels above
vD* . (a) Only Bn's value is  vD*  (k  1)I, and at least one of the
(n1) remaining bidders has vD*  kI  vi  v*D  (k  1)I, and Bn has bid at v*D  kI.

     n1

PIII,a 

n[1  F(D*  (k  1)I)]

j1

j

1 

1



n

n1 j

[F(D*  (k  1)I)  F(*D  kI)] j Fn1j(*D  kI).

(b) Only Bn's value is  vD*  kI, and at least one of the (n  1) remaining bidders has v*D  (k  1)I  vi  v*D  kI, and Bn does not have bid at vD*  (k  1)I, and so must bid v*D  kI.

     n1

PIII,b 

n[1  F(*D  kI)]

j1

j n j1

n1 j

[F(*D  kI)  F(vD*  (k  1)I)] j Fn1j(*D  (k  1)I).

(c) Two or more bidders have v*D  kI  vi  v*D  (k  1)I, but none has vi  v*D  (k  1)I.

   n
PIII,c  j2

n j

[F(*D  (k  1)I)  F(*D  kI)]j Fnj(*D  kI).

Hence, E[U(ps)]  U(0  0) · PI  U(D*  0) · [PII,a  PII,b  PII,c]  M k1 U(*D  kI  0) · [PIII,a  PIII,b  PIII,c], with M satisfying vD*  MI  v¯, and v¯  (v*D  MI)  I.

We then show that only some of these outcomes have probabilities of occurring that depend on n. We differentiate these outcomes' probabilities w.r.t. n, and, after some rearrangement and simplification, get the result. Next, we show that decreasing n increases the set of possible auctions where E[U(pS)] is higher with discrete than continuous bidding for a given n. This depends on the argument that although E[U(pS)] does not depend on n in a continuous bid auction, it increases as n decreases when bidding is discrete.
Sketch of Proof of Proposition 3. To show that the optimal final shill bid, s*t , exists, we first derive the seller's expected utility from submitting a specific set of shill bids, provided bidding stops at s0. To do so in the most general manner, we define a shill "run" as one or more shill bids placed consecutively by shill(s) without waiting for a response from bona fide bidders. Two shill runs must be separated by a bona fide bid. We then define a sequence of shill runs by s1, s2, . . . , where the discrete bid level at which the ith shill run ends is denoted si (noting si  v¯I). Thus, si  si1  2I, i 

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

263

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

1,2, . . . . The expected utility E[U(pS)|s0] from a series of shill runs ending at st is:
E(U(ps1, . . . ,st|s0))  U(st  I  0) · P((n),only|s0) · P((n)  s1
jt
  I|s0, (n),only) · P((n)  sj  I|(n)  sj1  I). j2
Using the properties of order statistics, we then estimate the probability that all of these shill bids will succeed. We also show that this probability does not depend on whether the intermediate shill bids are placed successively or separately. By inspection, we show that st* does not depend on s0, or n, or n. We show that s*t increases with v0, and decreases as the seller becomes more risk averse, using real analysis and calculus. Next we show that st*  I can be higher or lower than v*D, and that this depends on n and n. This proof combines two results already proven--that s*t does not depend on n or n, but that v*D does (shown in Proposition 1). This also allows us to show that only when n  0 does s*t  I  v*D for all n. The derivation of st*  I shows that it equals vC* if the latter bid lies on a discrete bid level.
Sketch of Proof of Proposition 4. We show that sometimes the seller's expected utility from shilling to s*t , which is the optimal shilling strategy shown in Proposition 3, is less than the seller earns for certain by accepting s0. The comparison between these two expected utilities depends on s0, because that is the certainty revenue the seller risks if he shills, and because P(v(n),only|s0), which raises the chances that shilling to s*t succeeds, depends on s0. It depends on n and n because P(v(n),only|s0) decreases with n, but only if n  0.
Proof of Proposition 5a: Note that the information demands on the seller regarding n are the same in both the optimal shilling and reserve strategies. Compared with using a reserve, the shilling seller has more information when he sets the lowest acceptable bid because he knows s0, which he does not know when setting the reserve. This allows the shilling seller (ex-ante) to enumerate each bidder's valuation with lower variance, compared with F(v) used in a reserve auction. This happens because {S0  s0} refines bidders' valuations to {s0  v(n)  v¯}, {s0I  v(n1)  s0  I}, and {v  {v(1), . . . , v(n2)}  s0I}. Further, ex-ante, the set of possible decisions the seller can make--to accept or reject bids--is identical in both auctions. Also note that the bidders' ex-ante set of decisions is the same with both reserves and shilling (bidders don't change their bidding strategy during the auction, as stated in § 3). Hence, the seller can never be worse off by using the optimal shilling strategy compared with the optimal reserve strategy (appealing to Blackwell's Theorem on Comparison of Experiments 1951).
We now show that auctions exist where, ex-ante, the seller is strictly better off with the optimal shilling strategy than with the optimal reserve strategy. By Blackwell's Theorem, E[U(pS)] is strictly higher in the shilling auction when (i) st*  I  vD* , or (ii) st*  I  v*D and it is optimal for the seller to not shill for at least one s0  st* (by Proposition 4 such auctions exist). In (i), shilling and reserve strategies yield different optimal lowest acceptable bids and hence different expected utilities for the seller. In (ii), optimal shilling is strictly dominating for the seller because the seller accepts at least

one s0 with shilling (based on more information) that he rejects with reserve, and he accepts that s0 because the seller's expected utility is greater from accepting s0 rather than shilling up to s*t . Now, the expected utility for the latter is the same as that from setting vD  v*D in the optimal reserve scenario, since v*D  s*t  I. Consequently, the seller's expected utility is strictly higher with optimal shilling. If st*  I  v*D and the seller shills for all s0  s*t , then the seller is as well off as in a reserve auction. Q. E. D.
Proof of Proposition 5b. (i) When n  0, consider shilling auctions with s*t  I  vD* (per Proposition 3c). The probability the item sells in these auctions is strictly greater with shilling than with reserves. Also, ex-ante, each bona fide bidder's expected surplus is greater in such shilling auctions, because (i) with probability  0, the property would sell at some bid  vD* in shilling auction, and (ii) P(any bidder's value st*  I)  P(bidder's value  v*D), since s*t  I  v*D. (ii) When n  0, consider shilling auctions with s*t  I  v*D. Using Proposition 4 and the arguments we have just stated in the proof of Proposition 5a, we conclude that auctions exist in which bidders are strictly better off (unless seller shills for all s0  s*t ,in which case the bidders are as well off as in reserve auction).
By Proposition 5a, the seller is at least as well off with shilling. Pareto dominance follows. Q. E. D.
References
Anders, George. 1999. How eBay will try to battle sham bids and mislabeling. The Wall Street Journal Jan. 15.
Blackwell, David. 1951. The comparison of experiments. Proceedings of the Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, University of California, Berkeley, 93­102.
Brough, James. 1963. Auction! Bobbs-Merrill, New York. Bulow, Jeremy, Paul Klemperer. 1996. Auctions versus negotiations.
Amer. Econom. Rev. 86 (1) 180­94. Capen, Edward C., Robert V. Clapp, William M. Campbell. 1971.
Competitive bidding in high risk situations. J. Petroleum Tech. 23 641­53. Cassady, Ralph Jr. 1967. Auctions and Auctioneering. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA. Cicero. 1990. De Officiis. Cicero in Twenty-Eight Volumes, vol. 21. Translated by Walter Miller. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. Dobrzynski, Judith H. 1995. The key to auctions . . . lot, bid, and gavel. The New York Times April 23. ----. 2000a. In online auction world, hoaxes aren't easy to see. The New York Times, June 2, p. A1. ----. 2000b. F.B.I. opens investigation of eBay bids. The New York Times, June 7, p. A1.
Engelbrecht-Wiggans, Richard. 1987. On optimal reservation prices
in auctions. Management Sci. 33 (6) 763­770.
Ginnow, Arnold O., George Gordon, eds. 1980. Corpus Juris Secun-
dum. West Publishing, St. Paul, MN.
Graham, Daniel A., Robert C. Marshall, Jean-Francois Richard. 1990.
Phantom bidding against heterogeneous bidders. Econom. Let-
ters 32 13­17.
Harris, Milton, Artur Raviv. 1981. Allocation mechanisms and the
design of auctions. Econometrica 49 1477­1499.
Hewett, David. 1994. Judge slams auction shilling. Maine Antiques
Digest January, 6A.

264

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

SINHA AND GREENLEAF The Impact of Discrete Bidding and Bidder Aggressiveness

Matthews, Steven A. 1980. Risk aversion and the efficiency of first and second price auctions. Working paper, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
----. 1987. Comparing auctions for risk averse buyers: A buyer's point of view. Econometrica 55 (May), 633­646.
McAfee, R. Preston, John McMillan. 1987. Auctions and bidding. J. Econom. Literature 25 (June) 699­738.
Milgrom, Paul, Robert J. Weber. 1982. A theory of auctions and competitive bidding. Econometrica 50 1089­1122.
Myerson, Roger B. 1981. Optimal auction design. Math. Oper. Res. 6 (February) 58­73.
Pratt, John W. 1964. Risk aversion in the small and in the large. Econometrica 32 (January­April) 122­136.
Riley, John G., William F. Samuelson. 1981. Optimal auctions. Amer. Econom. Rev. 71 381­92.
Roberts, Ralph. 1986. Auction Action: A Survival Companion for any Auction Goer. Tab Books, Blue Ridge Summit, PA.
Rothkopf, Michael H., Ronald M. Harstad. 1994a. Modeling competitive bidding: A critical essay. Management Sci. 40 364­84.

----, ----. 1994b. On the role of discrete bid levels in oral auctions. European J. Oper. Res. 74 572­581.
----, ----. 1995. Two models of bid-taker cheating in Vickrey auctions. J. Bus. 68 (2) 257­267.
Rubin, Leona. 1972. How to Defend Yourself at Auctions. Westover Publishing Co., Richmond, VA.
Schwartz, Evan I. 1998. At online auctions, good, and raw, deals. The New York Times March 5.
Simpson, Glenn R. 2000. EBay coin auctions produce allegations of `shill' bidding. The Wall Street Journal, June 12, p. A3.
Smith, Charles W. 1989. Auctions: The Social Construction of Value. The Free Press, MacMillan Inc., New York and London.
Tirole, Jean. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Vickrey, William. 1961. Counterspeculation, auctions, and competitive sealed tenders. J. Finance 16 8­37.
Yamey, B. S. 1972. Why £2,310,000 for a Velazquez? An auction bidding rule. J. Polit. Economy 80 1323­1327.

This paper was received May 28, 1998, and was with the authors 13 months for 4 revisions; processed by Wagner Kamakura.

Marketing Science/Vol. 19, No. 3, Summer 2000

265

