http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/mksc/

MARKETING SCIENCE
Vol. 38, No. 1, January­February 2019, pp. 68­87 ISSN 0732-2399 (print), ISSN 1526-548X (online)

The Performance Measurement Trap

Dmitri Kuksov,a J. Miguel Villas-Boasb
a Naveen Jindal School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas 75080; b Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720 Contact: dmitri.kuksov@utdallas.edu, http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3157-5013 (DK); villas@haas.berkeley.edu,
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1299-4324 (JMV-B)

Received: June 29, 2017 Revised: March 19, 2018; June 12, 2018 Accepted: June 22, 2018 Published Online in Articles in Advance: January 30, 2019
https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2018.1122
Copyright: © 2019 INFORMS

Abstract. This paper investigates the effect of performance measurement on the optimal effort allocation by salespeople when firms are concerned about retention of salespeople with higher abilities. It shows that introducing a salesperson performance measurement may result in productivity, profit, and welfare losses when all market participants optimally respond to the expected information provided by the measurement and the (ex post) optimal retention efforts of the firm cannot be (ex ante) contractually prohibited. In other words, the dynamic inconsistency of the management problems of inducing the desired effort allocation by the salespeople and the subsequent firm objective to retain high-ability salespeople may result in performance measurement yielding an inferior outcome.

History: Yuxin Chen served as the senior editor and Anthony Dukes served as associate editor for this article.
Supplemental Material: The online appendix is available at https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2018.1122.

Keywords: game theory · contract design · principal-agent problem · sales force compensation

The worker is not the problem. The problem is at the top! Management!
--W. Edwards Deming, The Complete Deming Library Collection Discussion Guide,
W. Edwards Deming Institute, p. 409.
1. Introduction
Measurement of salesperson performance is one of the key tasks of many sales organizations. It is a complicated task, because what a firm can measure is often not very well aligned with what it is trying to achieve in the long run. As Likierman (2009) argues, what is measured may potentially provide little insight into a firm's performance, and may potentially hurt the firm. In particular, firms may use what can be more easily measured, or what is more popular, and not activities that are difficult to measure, immeasurable, or less popular. For example, Likierman (2009) points out that the Net Promoter Score (Reichheld 2003), which measures the likelihood that customers will recommend a product, may be a useful indicator only when recommendations play a crucial role in the consumers' decisions, but the importance of customer recommendations may vary from industry to industry. As another example, the number of telephone calls of a salesperson may be easy to document, although the content and preparation for those telephone calls may not be as easy to measure but potentially be a more important component of the selling effort.
It is well known that putting too much weight on visible measures not perfectly aligned with the organization's

objectives may lead to a detrimental distortion of the employee's effort allocation. As a recent example from business practice, Wells Fargo's incentives for employees to cross-sell accounts to customers led to adverse behavior by employees, and in the fall of 2016, Wells Fargo ended up considerably hurt by both customer backlash and regulatory actions (see Corkery 2016). These incentives also involve future employee promotions, which affect the employees that decide to continue with the bank and the employees that decide to move on. Likewise, if a product manager is evaluated on the proportion of successful product introductions (which is easier to measure than the contribution of the manager to the overall profitability of a manufacturer), the manager may distort work toward pushing products that are likely to fail (Simester and Zhang 2010). Because these evaluations may affect the careers of the managers at the company, they also endogenously affect which mangers decide to stay with the company versus taking positions in other companies.
Retention of good employees is an important management goal. Therefore, even in the absence of explicit incentives, expected future retention efforts and other career concerns introduce implicit incentives (Dewatripont et al. 1999). For an example related to the marketing of academic ideas,1 consider an assistant professor in a tenure track position at a university. The university wants to retain scholars who make and disseminate advancements in their fields (e.g., teaching and research). But the university imperfectly observes the assistant professor's ability. Good assistant professors may receive offers

68

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

69

from other universities, which may induce strong scholars to be productive in their rookie positions. In addition, the university might try to measure some of the assistant professor's output directly, but imperfectly. For instance, the university may simply count publications and teaching ratings. This could be detrimental to the university's mission because the scholars could distort their efforts in favor of the measured variables, in contrast to making and disseminating advancements in their field more generally.
Retention of top salespeople is always seen as a top concern for companies (e.g., Sager 1990, Forbes Coaches Council 2018). According to Rocco (2017), the level of turnover of salespeople is between 25% and 30% per year, and identifying and retaining talent is a challenge for companies, with a reported average cost per turnover of $97,690. As noted by Zoltners et al. (2008, figure 3, p. 120), "in a successful sales system," the management team has to work at "retaining good people."
Broadly speaking, one can categorize an organization's objectives when creating an incentive structure into objectives linked to inducing the desired performance (effort level and effort allocation across various productive tasks) and objectives linked to hiring and/ or retaining the most productive salespeople. In a multiperiod employment market where relatively shortlived contracts are renewed periodically (e.g., each year), the effort, effort allocation inducement, and salespeople retention problems are intertemporarily linked. Performance measurement in one period is used for current compensation according to the current incentive contract, but it also affects the future contract(s) offered to the salesperson because of the management's (future) inference of the salesperson's ability from the past (at the time of the inference) performance measurements. This, in turn, means that when deciding on the effort and its allocation, a salesperson needs to take into account not only the current contract's incentives, but the expected effect of his effort and its allocation on the value he expects from the future contracts. In other words, the full incentives will always have an implicit component coming from the value of the future contracts.
Furthermore, management decides not only how to use the available information (performance measurements) about the salespeople, but it also decides whether and how to implement performance measurement (i.e., which kind of information about salespeople to obtain). The number of measures, or the amount of monitoring, is a frequently considered decision (Likierman 2009). The obvious tradeoff is between the costs of measurement (e.g., the salespeople's compliance costs) and the assumed benefit of the more extensive measurement, which could lead, supposedly, to a better-designed incentive structure. It is well known that there could be a tendency to put too much weight on visible measures.

One may hope that a rational manager would be able to optimally weigh each metric so that the above problem is resolved, and more measurement would end up being beneficial to management. In other words, if management is fully rational, it seems intuitive that it should be able to design a better contract when more measurements are available. After all, it is within the power of management to not reward any of the metrics (see, e.g., the flat compensation result in Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991).
However, the implicit nature of incentives discussed above implies that management is unable to commit to appropriately weighing metrics over the long haul. Contract renewal introduces a dynamic inconsistency problem of the current objective of incentivizing effort and its allocation and the future objective of retaining salespeople whose records suggest better abilities.2 Because salespeople are forward looking and can expect this inconsistency, introduction of a new metric results not only in an enlargement of the set of the available instruments for the management, but also in a change of the salespeople's environment. Although the larger set of instruments could help to achieve the management's objectives and increase social welfare, the dynamic inconsistency could be detrimental. The net effect is not immediately clear, and as we show, it can be negative both on the profits and on overall productivity and social welfare. In the assistant professor example we used previously, the assistant professor allocates more effort to the number of publications and teaching ratings than what could potentially be optimal for the objective of making and disseminating advancements in the field. If measurement exists, removing the retention or career concerns through, for example, the tenure system is a potential solution. For example, removing the potential detriment of implicit incentives has been noted as the main argument for the lifetime appointment of judges (see https://judiciallearningcenter.org/judicial-independence/). A better solution could be not having the measurements (observations) that may introduce the implicit incentives to start with.
One may be inclined to ascribe negative outcomes of measurements or incentives to boundedly rational behavior or the coordination issues within an organization's management. But what we show in this paper is that under some conditions, even fully rational agents designing and responding to the optimal incentive contracts cannot avoid being hurt by the very fact of the measurement's existence. Specifically, we show that the net effect of an additional dimension being measured can decrease productivity, profits, and welfare, even when the management fully accounts for the current and future effects when designing the optimal compensation structure. We formalize the following intuition: Suppose that the total effort that a particular salesperson would exert is essentially fixed (i.e., not easily changed by incentives), and that in the

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

70

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

absence of additional performance measurement(s), salespeople are incentivized to allocate effort across two components in an efficient way. For example, in the absence of the number of telephone calls being measured, the salesperson allocates effort efficiently between the number of telephone calls made and the preparation for those calls. However, suppose the existing incentive to allocate effort efficiently (using the existing measurements) is not particularly strong so that a salesperson would distort his effort allocation if a new, nonnegligible incentive to do so is introduced.
For example, management may be able to observe and enforce the time spent at work, and any allocation of time across activities may not impose a disutility on the salespeople so far as they have to spend that time at work. In this case, a slight weight on overall output of the organization, even if this output is only weakly correlated with the effort allocation of a given salesperson, is sufficient to induce the salesperson's optimal effort allocation. As a result, the system is working nearly perfectly. Different salespeople contribute differently to the total output because of their different abilities, but each does what he can (providing the effort he is capable of and efficiently allocating it across the effort components), and nothing can be done about the abilities themselves.
To simplify the presentation, we will identify the total effort the salesperson is capable of with the salesperson's ability. Now suppose that because of a random value of the outside option (e.g., because of the changing preferences for living close to the current employment area), each salesperson may leave the company at the beginning of each period, but this decision may, at least for some salespeople, be affected by the compensation that he is offered. Then, to encourage the better salespeople not to leave the organization through an appropriate retention policy, that is, by offering a better next period contract to the better salespeople, management is interested in evaluating its salespeople's abilities.
Suppose further that the feasible measurement under consideration is the measurement of one, but not all, of the effort components. Note that without this additional performance measurement, given the optimal effort allocation, the salesperson's ability (total effort) is perfectly correlated with each of the effort components. Then a salesperson's ability could be perfectly judged from either component. This seems to provide a compelling argument for introduction of the performance measurement, even though it measures only one of the effort/performance components.3 However, knowing that management will offer better contracts in the next period to those salespeople who performed better on the measured component, if management starts measuring one of the dimensions of effort, and even if no weight is placed on it in the current

compensation schedule, salespeople will distort effort allocation toward that dimension in hopes of securing better contract offers in the next period. If this distortion is not costly for the salespeople, all effort may be allocated to only one component, thus possibly having a negative effect on the total output. In the salesperson example above, the salesperson would prepare the telephone calls minimally, and would just maximize the number of telephone calls made.
But would not management then be able to adjust the current compensation package to eliminate this distortion, perhaps through a negative weight in the current contract on the performance component measured? The answer is, generally, no. The reason, again, is salesperson heterogeneity. Generally, one might expect that salespeople will have some independent and private estimate of their likelihood of staying with the organization in the next period. Therefore, the best management can hope to achieve with the optimally designed "reverse incentives" contract is that some salespeople, knowing that they are more likely than average to leave, will be incentivized by the reverse incentive to distort the effort toward the other component, whereas most of the remaining salespeople, having a higher likelihood of staying than management estimates, will still distort their effort toward the measured component. The outcome is that, although any aggregate mix of effort allocations can be achieved, almost all salespeople may end up allocating effort inefficiently.
Note that perfect information, if costlessly available to management, should be welfare enhancing. However, imperfect measurement, insofar as it measures some, but not all, of the components of productive output, is likely to distort effort allocation. Although this measurement can be used for better retention and a better total effort incentive policy, these improvements are at the expense of the efficiency of the effort allocation. Furthermore, inability to commit to future contracts means that this asymmetric measurement problem may not be fully solvable.4 Therefore, when deciding on whether to introduce a partial (or imperfect) measurement (i.e., a measurement that weighs some of the effort/output components more heavily than others), the firm needs to decide whether the problems of effort enforcement and salesperson retention are more important than the problem of effort allocation. Thus, the common practice of collecting the data first and deciding what to do with them later could be a treacherous path even if the management is fully rational and benevolent.
We present this paper in the context of incentives for salespeople, but the ideas presented here could equally apply to incentives for product managers for new product development (e.g., Simester and Zhang 2010). More generally, the results here would apply to employees in an organization whose compensation depends on incentives.

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

71

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the related literature. Section 3 presents the model, and Section 4 considers the cases when measurement is not possible and when measurement is available on the first-period effort level. Section 5 presents the effects of different measurement technologies, and Section 6 concludes. The proofs are collected in the appendix (and the online appendix).
2. Related Literature
This paper builds on the extensive literature on the principal-agent and sales force compensation problems.5 This literature, in particular, explores the optimal weights the principal needs to place on measurements to account for effort distortion across multiple tasks (e.g., Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991, Hauser et al. 1994, Bond and Gomes 2009).6 For example, Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) show that when the effort distortion between tasks is sufficiently severe, flat pay (i.e., contracts ignoring performance measurement) may be optimal, and they discuss how it applies to the ongoing teacher compensation debate. Hauser et al. (1994) explore making the incentive scheme based on customer satisfaction measures as a way for employees to put effort on dimensions that have longer-term implications. Bond and Gomes (2009) explore the ability of the principal to affect a multitasking agent's efforts. The literature has also discussed what happens in a dynamic setting with the question of desirability of long-term contracts (e.g., Malcomson and Spinnewyn 1988) and renegotiationproofness. One usual assertion is that the principal and welfare are not hurt by more information (measurement), but this is due to the assumed ability of the principal to put a sufficiently low weight on what is being measured. Alternatively, we consider the problem of the principal's possible inability to commit to the future contracts and show that the optimal contract in the presence of more information (more performance measures) may lead to decreased profitability and social welfare.
More generally, this paper can be seen in the context of more information potentially leading to worse outcomes in strategic situations (e.g., Akerlof 1970). The political economy literature also has some results showing that transparency about actions can have negative effects (e.g., Prat 2005). In contracting, with short-term contracts, we can also have the ratchet effect of agents trying not to reveal their private information in earlier periods (e.g., Laffont and Tirole 1988).7 Most related to this paper, Crémer (1995) considers a dynamic consistency problem of the principal's commitment to incentivize effort by the threat of firing the agent in the presence of exogenous shocks to output. Assuming that the agent values job renewal, Crémer (1995) shows that in some cases, the principal would like to commit to not observing the agent's ability (or the exogenous reason for failure) to increase the agent's incentive to perform.

By not observing the reason for failure and therefore effectively committing to fire the agent if output is not up to a standard, the principal is able to circumvent the positive-pay restriction and increase the incentive for the agent to perform well without increasing the expected pay. In contrast to Crémer (1995), we examine the opposite problem: when the principal would like to provide fewer incentives to distort effort (Crémer 1995 considers only one component of effort, and therefore the problem of effort allocation does not arise).
Dynamic (in)consistency issues have been studied in various other contexts, such as a durable-goods monopoly setting prices over time (e.g., Coase 1972, Desai and Purohit 1998) and central bank policies on money supply (e.g., Kydland and Prescott 1977). In this paper, we essentially consider the implications of the dynamic inconsistency issue in a principal-agent framework.

3. The Model
In the next subsection, we formulate the model setup with only a limited justification for the assumptions and then, in the following subsection, discuss some assumptions, their consequences, and potential variations.

3.1. Model Setup
Consider a principal-agent model with agents having different abilities and interacting with the firm (principal) during two periods, indexed by t 1, 2. In the context of this paper, the agent is a salesperson. Because we abstract away from any effects of one salesperson's behavior on other salespeople or the incentives the principal has in treating other salespeople, we consider, without loss of generality, a single agent whose type is uncertain to the principal. The principal's (management's) objective is to maximize the total expected payoff (profit) net of the compensation paid to the salesperson across the two periods by choosing a contract (compensation conditional on observables) to offer the salesperson at the beginning of each period. Let t denote the profit gross of the expenditure on salespeople compensation in period t, and let Ct be the compensation paid to the salesperson in period t. Table 1 presents the full notation. To simplify the presentation, assume no discounting. Then the firm's problem is

2

max
C1,2 0

t

1

E(t - Ct).

(1)

The salesperson compensation (contract) could depend on everything the principal observes prior to the offer or at the time of payment, beause we assume the payment is done after the relevant period is over. However, the contract is restricted to provide nonnegative pay to the salesperson for any outcome (limited liability). This could be justified, for example, because obtaining money from a salesperson who received no income in the current period may not be possible.

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

72

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

Table 1. Notation

Variable
t t Ct x
y e ei

ai
b
b+ 1+b
-B z
m(x)
Ph
c1 c2, c2, c2

Description
Period, either period 1 or period 2 Profit in period t gross of payment to salesperson Payment to salesperson in period t Dimension of effort that can be potentially measured
(xt means x in period t) Dimension of effort that cannot be measured Vector (x, y) of effort choices Total effort that can be exerted by a salesperson of
type i, ei xi + yi assuming eh 2 and e 0 "Productivity" of salesperson, affecting probability of
high outcome,  xy Ability of salesperson of type i maximal "productivity,"
ai (ei/2)2 Parameter that indexes informativeness of profit
realization Probability of high outcome (whose payoff is set to "1")
Low profit outcome, with B > 0 Outside option of salesperson in the second period,
distributed uniformly on [0, 1] Measurement of effort dimension x; 1 with probability
x/eh and 0 with probability 1 - x/eh Posterior probability of the high-type salesperson given
the observables in the first period Base compensation Payment to salesperson if high outcome and/or high
measurement

Period t's profit is uncertain and depends on the salesperson's choice of the effort allocation e  (x, y)  R+2,
where x and y are the two dimensions of effort. For
example, x could represent the number of telephone
calls, and y could represent the time spent preparing for those calls. To be clear, we will call the vector e  (x, y)
the effort allocation and the sum of effort components e  x + y the total effort. Assume that the salesperson
has a per-period budget constraint on his total effort xit + yit  ei; where ei depends on the salesperson's type, which can be high, h, or low, , that is, i  {, h}. Assume
that besides the budget constraint on effort, the sales-
person has no intrinsic disutility of effort. To simplify the potential contract structures, we model
profit as possibly attaining one of just two possible values,
one of which is normalized to 1 and the other of which is denoted by -B, with B > 0, and model the effect of the salesperson's effort allocation as affecting the probability of achieving the high profit level. Assume that the probability of high profit increases in the salesperson's productivity, defined as (x, y) x · y. Let us call the maximal productivity of a salesperson his ability a. Maximizing (x, y) subject to x + y  ei, we have ai (ei/2)2. Thus, the salesperson's ability is a characteristic of the salesperson,
whereas his productivity is his choice variable constrained by his ability. To be specific, we assume the following

gross profit specification as a function of the salesperson's productivity:

t(it)

1, with probability (b + it)/(b + 1); -B, with probability (1 - it)/(b + 1),
(2)

where it xityit is the salesperson's choice of productivity in period t, and b > 0 is a parameter that determines how much the profit is (in expectation) informative about the salesperson's ability.
To satisfy the constraint that the probabilities of the two profit outcomes are positive, we need 0  e < eh  2. (If eh 2, the efficient allocation x y 1 leads to ah 1.) To simplify derivations, assume e 0 and eh 2 so that a 0 and ah 1. To avoid considerations of the boundary conditions on the wage of the low-type salesperson, assume b  B (so that the expected profit from the low-type worker given no wage is nonnegative).
To introduce a nontrivial employee retention problem, assume that the salesperson has an outside option z in the second period, where z is uniformly distributed on [0, 1] and independent of salesperson's type. The outside option is zero in the first period, so the salesperson accepts any nonnegative offer in the first period.8 The second-period outside option is known to the salesperson before his decision of whether to accept the second-period offer but may or may not be known to him before his choice of the effort allocation e1 in the first period. We first assume that the salesperson does not know z before the effort allocation stage of the first period; he learns it just before he needs to decide whether to accept the second-period offer. We then consider a variation of the model to see how the results change if the salesperson can condition his effort allocation e1 on the second-period outside option z, or if he has some (but not full) information about it.
In addition to choosing the contract to offer, the principal needs to decide whether to introduce measurement m(x) of the x component of the salesperson's effort.9 In the example above, this would be measurement of the number of telephone calls made by the salesperson. We assume that the measurement of the y component, beyond its inference from the profit realization and any available measurement of x, is not feasible. In the example above, it is not possible to measure the time spent by the salesperson in preparation for the telephone calls, or in a typical sales funnel (e.g., Zoltners et al. 2008), after leads are generated, it is not possible to measure the lead qualification effort. To reduce the complexity of the compensation structure, assume that m(x) may take only one of two values, call them 0 and 1, but the probability of the high measurement

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

realization (1) increases in x.10 For analytical tractability assuming linearity and that the high type can ensure m(x) 1 by allocating all effort toward x, we use the following measurement specification:

m(x)

1, with probability x/eh x/2; 0, with probability 1 - x/eh 1 - x/2.
(3)

If measurement is introduced, the compensation in each period is a function of the current and past profits and measures of x. If measurement is not introduced, the compensation can be a function of only current and past profits. There are three conceptually different possibilities of the timing when m(x) is introduced: (1) after the salesperson decided on his effort allocation e1 in the first period, (2) before the salesperson decided on his effort allocation e1 in the first period but after the first-period compensation rule was set (and it was done without having the possibility of measurement in mind), and (3) before the salesperson decided on his effort allocation e1 in the first period and the firstperiod compensation rule was determined with the possibility of the measurement in mind. We consider each of these cases. We first analyze the case in which the measurement of the component x is possible only in the first-period effort (Section 4). In Section 5.2, we consider the case in which the measurement of component x is possible in both the first and second periods.

3.2. Discussion of the Model Assumptions In the model setup, we have made some specific assumptions about the functional forms of the salesperson's productivity (x, y), the profit function (), the effort component measurement function m(x), the outside option z, and some parameter values either to be specific or to simplify the analysis. We now discuss these assumptions in turn.
First, we have assumed a multiplicative production function (x, y) xy. In the running example of the salesperson allocating effort between preparing for calls and making calls, this specification captures the idea that salesperson telephone calls without preparation have limited effect, and preparing telephone calls without actually making them has also zero effect on sales. The probability of high profits in this specification is maximized at x y ei/2; that is, the efficient effort allocation, which is also the most desired by the firm, is for the salesperson to equally split the total effort between the two effort components. This exact functional form of (x, y) is not important, but what we need is that there is some optimal split of effort across two (or more) components, so that directing all effort toward one of the components reduces profits. For ehxoaldmipfle,(xw, ye)havexc+hecyk.ed that our main results also

73
Let us next consider the functional form of the profit function. The informativeness of the profit realization (whether it is 1 or -B) about the salesperson's actions depends on b and tends to zero when b tends to infinity. For clearer presentation, we will focus the analysis on the case of large b and B but discuss, when appropriate, what happens when these parameters are not too large. The case of large b and B can be seen as a case in which the positive output is highly likely (so that even the low-ability salespeople can easily sell), but the loss is important when the positive output does not occur. For example, in some types of work, a mistake (selling a dangerous item, causing an injury while demonstrating a product, making an inappropriate comment, etc.) may lead to a lawsuit or a viral consumer backlash. In terms of the model, a large b means that the output obtained is not very informative of the salesperson's ability, which is realistic, for example, when an individual salesperson is a part of a large group (i.e., the profit of a large retailer is not very informative about the contribution of each individual employee). A special case b B of the above profit specification has a special meaning: in this case, the expected profit is equal to it. Therefore, considering this case allows one to consider how the results depend on the informativeness of profit realization (driven by b) keeping constant the importance of the salesperson's ability to the firm.
Note that, given a 0, the allocation decision of the low type (allocating zero across the two components) is immaterial, which considerably simplifies the analysis. When a 0, the probability of the profit being high (being 1) is b/(b + 1), and the probability of the profit being low (being -B) is 1/(b + 1). When ah 1 and the salesperson chooses the efficient effort allocation, the firm gets the high profit with probability one. If the salesperson is choosing the efficient effort allocation, a low profit implies that the salesperson has low ability for sure (this part also considerably simplifies the analysis), but a high profit does not necessarily imply that the salesperson has the high ability.
Turning to the technology of measurement (the specification of m(x)), it is important for our results that only one component could possibly be measured, but the exact specification is not essential. Allowing m(x) to probabilistically take one of the two outcomes simplifies the analysis because it implies that the compensation is not a function of a continuous variable but of a binary one. At the same time, it could be realistic that the measurement is noisy and more discrete than the effort component value. For example, a manager could measure the number of a salesperson's calls by observing whether the salesperson is on the phone at a particular one time. We model performance measurement as a (noisy) measure of effort component. Although various aspects of performance (e.g., current sales, profit, or customer satisfaction rating) are distinct

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

74

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

from various components of effort (e.g., number of sales calls or the time spent doing research or preparing for teaching), sometimes they can be linked because a specific type of effort (input) is most productive for a specific type of performance (output). For example, learning students' names may be useful for increasing teaching evaluations but may not be so effective for actual student learning (for which the time spent preparing teaching materials could be more useful).
Note that with the measurement technology as defined, and given the assumptions e 0 and eh 2, a measurement of 1 indicates that the salesperson has high ability (which simplifies the analysis), whereas a measurement of 0 does not necessarily indicate that the salesperson has low ability as long as the highability salesperson is not expected to shift all his effort toward component x. We have also analyzed (see Section 5.1) the possibility that x can be measured precisely, and although that analysis is more complicated (in particular, because it requires the consideration of a > 0), our main results continue to hold. This shows some robustness to the assumptions on the measurement technology.
Finally, we have assumed that the salesperson has an outside option z in the second period. It is important for our results, because it introduces the retention problem in the firm's objective function, which leads to the second-period compensation being correlated with the firm's expectation of the salesperson's ability. This outside option could come from the utility of working elsewhere or staying at home (e.g., given family changes), the changing cost of traveling to work due to the potential salesperson's move for family reasons, etc. For simplicity, we assume that z does not depend on the salesperson's type i. This could potentially be justified by idiosyncratic preferences of the salespeople or other employers that are not related to how productive the salesperson is in the present firm. For example, the cost of traveling to work could affect the outside option of a salesperson without affecting the productivity of the salesperson once employed, or the salesperson's desire to stay at home to raise a baby may not be dependent on the salesperson's skill at work. On the other hand, outside work offers may be positively correlated with the salesperson's ability. If we considered z to be positively correlated with ability, we would have that the probability of retention of lowability salespeople would be increased, and this could increase the incentives to discriminate between the high- and low-ability salespeople and, therefore, potentially further increase distortions.
4. Model Analysis
To understand the effect of measurement, we need to compare the outcomes when measurement is not possible, which we will call the benchmark case, with

the outcomes when measurement is introduced and the agents (the salesperson and the manager) optimally react to the new information. For the latter, the outcomes could be different depending on when the measurement is introduced and, if it is not introduced at the start, whether the introduction is expected by the salesperson. We therefore consider what happens under different timings of the measurement introduction.
We first derive the optimal compensation schedule in the benchmark case when the measurement of x is not a possibility (Section 4.1). We then consider how the second-period compensation and outcomes are affected if the measurement of the first-period component x of the effort is unexpectedly introduced in period 1 after the salesperson already committed to his first-period effort allocation (Section 4.2). Next, we consider how the outcomes change if the salesperson optimally responds to the presence of the measurement of the first-period effort, but assuming that the first period's compensation rule is unchanged after the measurement is unexpectedly introduced (Section 4.3). Conceptually, the last consideration is when the measurement introduction was unexpected by the firm, whereas the earlier one is when it was unexpected by the salesperson. Finally, we consider optimal compensation contracts in both periods given that the measurement of the first period's x component is present, or is expected to be introduced (Section 4.4). Comparing the outcomes under the last scenario with the previous ones, we show that the introduction of measurement could be detrimental to the principal and to social welfare. We discuss what one would expect in equilibrium where the introduction of the measurement is a manager's decision variable in Section 4.5. The case of measurement of the x component in both periods is presented in Section 5.2.

4.1. Benchmark Case: Optimal Contract

Without Measurement

Given that the salesperson's outside option is zero in

the first period and that he does not have an intrinsic

preference as to how to allocate the maximum effort ei
at his disposal, compensation C1 11 1 with  > 0 achieves efficient allocation (so far as the salesperson

does not expect the second-period contract to provide

perverse incentives for the salesperson to lower the firm's expectation of his abilities).11 Thus, in equilib-

rium, we have efficient effort allocation and C1 0, that is, the first best for the principal (because contracts are

not allowed to have negative pay) with the expected

first-period

profit

of

1 2

+

1 2

bb-+B1.

In the second period, the problem is slightly more

complicated. Let Ph be the posterior probability of the salesperson having high ability given the observables

after the first period, that is, the first-period profit

in this case. Then one can derive that the optimal

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

75

second-period contract C2 c1 +c212 1 has (see the appendix for details)

c1

0 and c2

Ph

(1

+ b)2 2(b2

+ +

(1 Ph

- +

Ph)(b - 2Phb)

B)b.

(4)

If Ph 1, then the firm is indifferent between any c1 > 0 and c2 > 0 as long as their sum is the same; this is because 2 1 for sure for the high type. But if Ph < 1, the above solution is uniquely optimal. By Bayes' rule,

Pr(h | 1 1) 11++2bb, and Pr(h | 1 -B) 0. (5)

Substituting these into (4), we obtain the second-period
payment C2 to the salesperson as a function of the firstand second-period profits:

C2

b

-B 2b

+

c2

11

1

· 12

1,

where

c2



2(1

+

(1 + b)3B 2b)(1 + b +

b2)b

.

(6)

The

expected

net-of-compensation

profit

is

1

-

1 2

B+1 b+1

in

the first period (it is equal to 1 if the salesperson is of

high

ability

and

b-B b+1

if

he

is

of

low

ability),

and

E(2 - C2)

((1 + b)3 + (b - 8(1 + b)3(1 + 2b)(1

B)b2)2 +b+

b2)

+

(b - B)2 8(b + 1)3

(7)

in the second period. This follows from substituting the optimal contract, (6), into the expected profit, (A.1), and taking into account that the probability of 1 1 is 2(21++bb).
For example, for b B 0, we have C2 1/2 · 11 2 1, E(2 - C2) 1/8, and the expected total net profit of 5/8.12 For b B 10, we have C2 0.29 · 11 2 1, E(2 - C2) 0.07, and the expected total net profit of 0.57. As b B  , we have C2  1/4, E(2 - C2)  1/16, and the expected total net profit converging to 9/16.
Intuitively, the second-period profit and the total net profit decline with b B because the first-period profit becomes less informative of the salesperson's ability when b B increases, and the resulting less efficient retention is detrimental to both the firm and, on average
(across salesperson types), the salesperson. In particular, as b B increases from zero to infinity, the high-type salesperson's expected surplus (over the outside option z)
from the second-period compensation decreases from 1/8 to 1/32, whereas the low-type salesperson's surplus
increases from zero to 1/32, resulting in the average salesperson's surplus decreasing from 1/16 to 1/32.
Note that the average compensation remains the same,
but the expected value of it decreases because the value of

C2 to the salesperson is Pr(C2 > z) · E(C2 - z | C2 > z) E(C22)/2, that is, convex in C2.
Note also that the analysis and all the results of the
benchmark case apply whether the salesperson knows
his second-period outside option at the beginning of
the game or only just before his decision on whether
to accept the second-period offer. This is because, in equilibrium, the salesperson allocates the effort efficiently in the first period regardless of whether he plans to leave or stay with the firm in the second
period.
By differentiating c2 in (4) with respect to Ph, one can see that the optimal offer increases in the principal's belief about the salesperson's ability:

d c2 d Ph

(1 + b)2Bb 2(b2 + Ph + 2Phb)2

>

0.

(8)

This means that if there is some way for the salesperson to demonstrate high ability without incurring a significant cost, he would strictly prefer to do so. This is the key to the result that a performance measurement of one effort component would be used by the high-type salesperson to convince the firm that he is of the high type at a cost to the first-period profit. Of course, if profit is itself very informative or if the weight on the first-period profit is sufficiently high, then this first-period possible distortion by the salesperson may not happen. Also note that the above inequality means that, effectively, the expectation of the second-period contract puts an implicit positive weight on the first-period profit (because, all else being equal, 1 1 implies a higher probability of the high type than 1 -B does), which gives the salesperson a strictly positive incentive to allocate the first period's effort correctly; that is, even though the firstperiod equilibrium contract leaves the salesperson indifferent as to how to allocate his effort if the salesperson is myopic, the equilibrium is actually strict because of the expected-by-the-salesperson secondperiod contract's positive dependence on the first period's profit realization.

4.2. Unexpected Measurement Introduced After the First Period's Effort Allocation
Now consider a situation in which the measurement is unexpectedly introduced after the first period's effort allocation. This is an off-equilibrium case because we assume that the salesperson expects to be in the situation of the benchmark case; that is, he does not expect performance measurement, but the firm then introduces the performance measurement. Thus, the results of this case are going to be used to understand the driving forces and incentives to introduce the performance measurement, and not as predictions in and of themselves. This case is also useful for understanding and predicting

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

76

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

what the salespeople should expect if the firm is unable to commit to whether it would, or would not, introduce a performance measurement midgame.
In this case, the first-period contract, effort allocation, and profits are the same as in the previous case because the firm can do no better and the salespeople do not expect any measurement to occur. But the secondperiod contract can now be conditioned not only on t (t 1, 2) but also on the measurement realization m(x1).13 Given the efficient effort allocation in the first period, which we have because the salesperson (salespeople) did not expect the performance measurement, Bayes' rule now gives the following probabilities of the salesperson being of the high type conditional on the realizations of 1 and m(x1):

Pr(h | 1 1 and m(x1) 1) 1;

Pr(h | 1 1 and m(x1) 0)

11++3bb;

(9)

Pr(h | 1 -B and m(x1) 1) 1;

Pr(h | 1 -B and m(x1) 0) 0.

Note that the event {1 -B and m(x1) 1} does not occur if effort is allocated efficiently, so Bayes' rule does not apply in that case. Therefore, Pr(h | 1 -B and m(x1) 1) could take any value. We set this value at 1 because a low-type salesperson could never get m(x1) 1, whereas a high-type salesperson could get 1 -B and m(x1) 1 by not choosing an efficient effort allocation. In other words, this belief assignment is required for an
equilibrium to be sequential. However, the results below
will also hold if any other value (between 0 and 1) is
assumed.
Because, in the second period, the only new observable is 2, (4) continues to hold with Ph now depending on both the first period's profit and the first period's
measurement of x according to (9). Thus, the optimal second-period contract offer is c212 1, where c2 1/2 when m(x1) 1 or 1 -B and m(x1) 1, c2 (b - B)/ (2b) when 1 -B and m(x1) 0, and

c2

c2



(1 + b)3 2[2b3

+ 2(b - B)b2 + (1 + b)3]

when

(10)

1 1 and m(x1) 0.

Although the first-period decisions and, hence profit, are the same as in the benchmark case, the optimal contract above leads to the expected second-period net profit of

E(2 - C2)

1 (1 + 2b)(1 + b + b2) 8 2b3 + (1 + b)3

+

(b

-

B)

2(b

+

1)2b2 8(b

+ +

(2b + 1)(b2 + 1)(b - 1)2(2b3 + (1 + b)3)

B)

-

b,

(11)

which is higher than the second-period net profit in the

benchmark

case

by

1 8

(b2

b4 B2 +b+1)(1+2b)(1+3b+3b2

+3b3

).

As

b

B

increases from zero to infinity, the above profit de-

creases from 1/8 to 1/12. Given that the firm now has

better information about the salesperson's ability in

the current case relative to the benchmark, as one

would expect, the high-type salesperson retention

is higher, the low-type salesperson retention is lower,

and the profit and average salesperson surplus are

increased.

4.3. Measurement Introduced Before the First

Period's Effort Allocation

Consider now that the measurement is introduced when

the first-period compensation is set to zero, as in the

benchmark case (Section 4.1), but before the salesperson

decides on his effort allocation. Then the salesperson

knows that the manager will observe the measure m(x1) at the end of the first period. Then it is a dominant strategy

for the high-type salesperson to fully distort his first-period

effort allocation toward the x component. This is because

demonstrating a high type increases the expected payoff

in the second period in some instances but in no instance

decreases it.

Therefore, the expected first-period profit is reduced

to (b - B)/(b + 1); that is, it is as if all salespeople were of

the low type. The expected second-period profit in-

creases to (1 - 1/2) · 1/2 1/4 if the salesperson is of

the high type, which is the net profit from a retained

high-type salesperson multiplied by the probability of

retention of a high-type salesperson given the optimal

contract. (A high-type salesperson is identified for sure

through m(x) 1 in this case.) Likewise, it increases to

b-B b+1

-

1 2

b-B b

·

b b+1

1 2

b-B b

·

b b+1

1 4

b-B b+1

2 if the salesperson

is of the low type (which is also identified for sure

through m(x) 0). The total net second-period profit is

thus

1 8

1

+

(b-B)2 (b+1)2

. Note that, relative to the benchmark

case, the expected second-period net profit increases

because of the better identification and the better re-

tention of the high-type salesperson, but the first-

period profit suffers.

The negative impact of the measurement on the first-

period effort allocation due to the expected second-

period contract adjustment leads to the idea that the

first period's incentive to distort effort allocation

should be countered in the first-period compensation

package. We consider this strategy in the following

subsection. But first, to illustrate the difficulty of

countering the first-period distortion, let us derive the

high-type salesperson's benefit of the maximal dis-

tortion in the first period relative to no distortion, assuming that the firm does not expect a distortion.14

The salesperson's benefit of distortion comes from

the possibility of the {1 1 and m1 0} outcome in

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

77

the first period. In this case, which has probability 1/2

from the high-type salesperson's point of view, the

expected second-period offer is c2 c2, defined in (10). The salesperson will accept it with probability c2, achieving an average surplus, over the outside option

and given acceptance, of c2/2. Thus, the expected second
period's surplus contribution of this event (1 1 and m(x1) 0) to the salesperson's expected utility is c 2/4.

If the high-type salesperson converts this outcome to

m(x1) 1, the surplus is calculated similarly but with c2 replaced by 1/2, which results in the expected surplus of 1/16. For example, for b B 10, the benefit is

0.0525, which can be seen as quite substantial when

compared with the expected second-period net profit

of 0.07 derived in Section 4.1. This example illustrates

that convincing salespeople not to distort the first-

period effort allocation is going to be quite costly to

the firm relative to its expected second-period net

profit. On the other hand, as we have seen above, not

countering the maximal distortion is quite detrimental

to the first-period profit.

The above analysis was performed under the as-

sumption that the salesperson does not know the second-

period outside option's value z before allocating effort

in the first period. Let us now consider what happens if

the salesperson knows z before allocating effort in the

first period. As presented above, we need to consider

only the high-type salesperson's effort allocation de-

cisions because the low-type salesperson can exert only

zero effort. In this case, if z  1/2, the high-type sales-

person, in equilibrium, does not value the possible

second-period offers and thus will, in equilibrium,

efficiently allocate his effort in the first period. If

z < 1/2, the high-type salesperson strictly prefers to

show that he is of the high type to receive the second-

period offer with c2 1/2. Therefore, he will distort his

effort maximally. Thus, the high-type salesperson dis-

torts his effort with a probability of one-half, and if he

distorts it, he does so maximally. Therefore, the first-

period profit contribution coming from high-type

salespeople

decreases

to

1 2

·

1 2

14. Because all sales-

people who can potentially stay distort their effort

maximally in the first period, the second-period net

profit is the same as that in the case where salespeople

did not know their outside offer, and the first-period

profit

reduces

to

1 4

+

3 4

bb-+B1.15

Thus,

the

total

profit

is

still

reduced relative to the one in the benchmark case.

Note that in this case, the benefit of distortion is not

the same for all salespeople who distort their effort

allocation: those with z close to 1/2 are almost in-

different between distorting and not distorting their

effort allocation, whereas those with z below c2 offered in the {1 1 and m(x1) 0} outcome have the highest

incentive to distort.

4.4. Measurement Introduced Before the First-

Period Contract

We now turn to the main case of the contract design

when all the parties know at the beginning of the game

that the measurement was introduced. Because dis-

torting x upward from the efficient allocation in the first

period reduces the first period's expected profits be-

cause of the increased x1, the principal may try, at least partially, to counteract this first-period distortion in the

first-period contract by a combination of (a) paying for

1 1 when m(x1) 1, (b) paying for 1 1 when m(x1) 0, or (c) paying for m(x1) 0 when 1 -B. Option (c) is clearly worse than (b) because it allocates

more spending toward low-type salespeople and

provides less incentive to efficiently allocate effort to

increase profit. The relative optimality of the first two

instruments is less straightforward. Still, for b > 4, an

increase in the weight on outcome in (a) is counter-

productive. (Increasing x increases the probability of this outcome when b  4.16) Therefore, for large b, the

optimal contract will involve a positive pay only on the

outcome in (b). This is intuitive because such a contract

gives salespeople the incentive to move x down toward

the efficient amount both through conditioning on 1 being high (profit sharing incentivizes an efficient al-

location) and through conditioning on m(x1) being low (an incentive to reduce x from whatever level it would

otherwise be set to).

Consider now the conditions under which a high-type

salesperson prefers no distortion to the maximal dis-

tortion given the first-period incentive C1 c11 1,m(x1) 0 and assuming that the firm expects no distortion. (The

appendix also shows that partial distortion is never

optimal.) Note that the maximal distortion redistributes

the event {1 1 and m(x1) 0}, which for a high-type salesperson with no distortion has probability 1/2, to the

event {1 1 and m(x1) 1} with (total additional) prob-

ability

b-1 2(1+b)

and

to

the

event

{1

-B and m(x1)

1}

with (total additional) probability 1+1b. Each of these

cases leads to an increase in the second-period offer

from c2 c2 derived in Subsection 4.2 to 1/2 and results in a loss of the first-period incentive c. Note that the

benefit of increased pay in the second period needs to be

counted net of foregoing the outside option and taking

into account the probability of staying with the firm. In

other words, the expected benefit of a contract with the

expected

pay

of

w

is



w 0

(w

-

z)

dz

w2/2. Thus, to pre-

vent a high-type salesperson deviation to the full dis-

tortion of x, we need

c



c



(1/2)2/2

-

c22/2



1 8

-

c22. 2

(12)

Consider now whether it is beneficial for the principal to incentivize no distortion in the first period. (As we

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

78

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

established above, this needs to be compared with the

maximal distortion.) Given no effort distortion in the

first period, the low-type salesperson will get c with

probability 1+bb, and the high-type salesperson will get c with probability 1/2. The expected cost for the principal

of incentivizing no distortion in the first period is

therefore

1+3b 4(1+b)

c.

The

expected

gross

benefit

of

in-

centivizing no distortion (relative to full distortion) in

the

first

period

is

1 2

Bb++11.

The salesperson's effort allocation distortion in the

first period would help the profit in the second period by

allowing a superior second period's contract (because of

the salesperson's ability being fully revealed). Subtracting

the second-period net profit given no first-period dis-

tortion (derived in Section 4.2) from the second-period net

profit under maximal first-period distortion (derived in

Section 4.3), we obtain that the second-period value of the

distortion to the firm is

1

b3

8 2b3 + (1 + b)3

+

(b

-

B)

b

-

2(b 8(b

+ +

1)2b2 + 1)2(2b3

(1 +

+ (1

b)(b - + b)3)

B)b.

(13)

We can then obtain that the benefit of countering the maximal distortion is higher than the total cost of doing so. Given that the principal counters the distortion, the first-period profit (net of the cost of preventing the

distortion)

becomes

1 2

1

+

b-B b+1

-

1+3b 4(1+b)

c,

the

second-

period profit is as in (14), and therefore, the total net

profit is smaller than it would be in the benchmark case.

For example, for b B  , the net profit converges to

1/2, which is smaller than the net profit when the

measurement is not possible (which tends to 9/16) but

greater than the net profit would be if the firm did

not counter the first-period distortion (0 + 1/8 1/8).

Summarizing the results of this subsection, we obtain the following proposition (in the above, we needed b > 4 to rule out strategy (a); see the appendix for the proof that the statements hold also for other values of b).

Proposition 1. Suppose salespeople do not know their secondperiod outside option z before allocating their first-period effort. Then, if the measurement of one of the effort components is implemented at the start of the game, we have the following:
(1) The firm chooses to incentivize salespeople not to distort their first-period effort allocation. This results in a loss in the first period's profit but with no change in efficiency.
(2) The firm uses the first period's measurement for a better retention of high-type salespeople in the second period. This is (on average) beneficial to the high-type salespeople and detrimental to the low-type salespeople, and results in increased second-period profits.
(3) The net result of the two effects above is that the total net profit decreases, whereas the salespeople, on average, are better off.
(4) Social welfare increases.

The proposition states that there is no loss of efficiency in the first period and that the total social welfare increases. Let us now discuss the generality of these two results when productive salespeople are heterogeneous in the first period. As we show below, the incentive to distort may be too large, and the firm may then choose not to counter it. This can then lead to the possibility of welfare losses due to lower productivity. In fact, if the productive salespeople are heterogeneous in the first period, there could be no way to design an incentive to not distort effort. To show this within this model, let us get back to the possibility that the salespeople have some information about their second-period outside option before they choose their first-period effort allocation.17
In contrast to the previous model analysis, now assume that at the beginning of the first period, the salespeople know z precisely. In this case, if measurement is introduced, salespeople who know that they are going to leave for sure, for example, those with z > 1/2, do not have an incentive to distort x1 unless the first-period contract provides them with an incentive to distort effort.
Therefore, because potentially half of the productive salespeople will leave, when designing the incentive structure to induce no (or less) distortion by the other salespeople, the firm needs to make sure that the incentive is not strong enough to fully distort the effort allocation of the salespeople who will leave. The firm can use a combination of a positive weight on the firstperiod profit 1 to incentivize no distortion of those planning to leave and an additional incentive through a positive weight on m(x1) 0.
The optimal compensation for 1 cannot be higher than 2 because that is the maximum possible output over two periods of a high-ability salesperson. Therefore, the maximal incentive that it provides tends to zero as b tends to infinity. This implies that if any weight is put on m(x1) 0 in the first-period contract, as b tends to infinity, the salespeople that are expecting to leave the firm for sure (i.e., those with z > 1/2) will distort their effort allocation maximally toward the lowest x1 (i.e., toward x1 0). Because the firm benefits from identifying the type of the salespeople who are staying with the organization for better retention efficiency in the second period, it prefers those salespeople who will stay to distort their effort allocation, as opposed to the salespeople who will leave. Therefore, to not have the salespeople who will leave distort their effort allocation fully, the optimal weight on m(x1) 0 must tend to zero as b tends to infinity; that is, as b tends to infinity, the first-period contract approaches the form p11 1 (for some nonnegative p).
Again, because the optimal p is bounded from above (as it is by 2), the incentive it provides to not distort the effort allocation tends to zero as b tends to infinity. Therefore, as b tends to infinity, almost all salespeople who will stay distort their effort allocation maximally. (Only those with z close to 1/2 do not care much about

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

79

the second-period offer and therefore do not distort their

effort given a small incentive.) In turn, because p has little

effect on salesperson behavior for large b, the optimal p

tends to zero as b  . It then follows that for large b,

the first-period profit approximately equals 1/4 + 3/4 ·

(b - B)/(b + 1), and the second-period profit approxi-

mately

equals

1 8

1

+

(b-B)2 (b+1)2

, and we have the following

proposition. (See the appendix for a formal proof.)

Proposition 2. Suppose the high-type salespeople know their second-period outside option z before allocating effort in the first period. Then, if measurement is introduced, for sufficiently large b, we have the following results:
(1) Half of the high-type salespeople maximally distort their first-period x1 upward and stay in the second period (accept the second-period offer).
(2) Half of the high-type salespeople do not distort their first-period effort and leave (do not accept the second-period offer).
(3) The total net profit and the total social welfare are lower than if the measurement were not introduced.
Note that in a more complete model, which would account for the origins of the outside option and the benefit to other firms of salespeople leaving this firm, one can argue that any information asymmetry between firms and salespeople is welfare reducing because it results in inefficient allocation of salespeople across firms. (Essentially, compensation packages may be only reallocating surplus from firms to salespeople, but unequal compensations, due to different information that different firms have about the salesperson, means that the salesperson may stay at a less preferable firm.) Such consideration of the social desirability of retention efforts is beyond the scope of this paper.
Proposition 2 shows how some heterogeneity among high-type salespeople (namely, their knowledge of different outside option values in the second period) results in the inability of the firm to prevent salesperson effort distortion in the first period by up to one-half of the salespeople. The only reason most salespeople do not distort effort is that half of the salespeople are essentially homogenous: the effort allocation of those who know they will be leaving for sure is not affected

by the exact value of the outside option. With more heterogeneity in salesperson beliefs about the probability of leaving, one could obtain that, although in aggregate the firm may incentivize any proportion of x and y efforts, it may be that nearly all salespeople maximally distort their effort. The online appendix provides an example of such a model variation.
Although in all the different setups above we have that measurement, on average, benefits the high-type salespeople, one can now see that introducing a firstperiod outside option or competition between organizations so that the salespeople may share the expected welfare surplus from employment through the firstperiod offer could lead to the introduction of measurement decreasing the payoffs of the salespeople and the organization alike.
4.5. Equilibrium Measurement Decision So far, we have considered the effects of measurement without an explicit consideration of the equilibrium decision of whether to introduce it. Table 2 summarizes the results of the previous subsections with respect to the effects of measurement on productivity and profits depending on the expectations and when it is introduced. If a measurement can be introduced at a moment's notice (i.e., if we add measurement introduction stages after each decision possibility of the original game), then, given the assumed time line of decisions, the analysis of Section 4.2 implies that the measurement will be introduced. The salesperson will rationally expect it, and the equilibrium outcome will be as if measurement were actually introduced at the beginning of the game. According to Proposition 1, this leads to lower profits. In other words, the manager would like to commit to not introducing the measurement. If such a commitment is possible at the beginning of the game, again as is clear from Proposition 1, the equilibrium outcome will be the manager's commitment to not measure, and we will have outcomes as in the benchmark case.
In reality, measurement technology may not allow instant introduction. Consider, for instance, our example of measuring the number (or duration) of a salesperson's calls. If the salesperson has an office without all-glass

Table 2. Effects of Measurement

Timing

Productivity in period 1

Outcome Productivity in period 2

Total net profits

After effort allocation Before effort allocation Before contract choice

No change Decrease No change

Increase Increase Increase

Increase Decrease Decrease

Notes. All changes are relative to the corresponding outcomes without measurement. Timing is relative to the first-period decisions. Productivity changes are due to the effort allocation changes in period 1 and changed retention in period 2.

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

80

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

walls and the phone bill does not itemize calls, introducing the measurement (requiring a call log or openoffice environment) could happen simultaneously with the salesperson adjusting his effort allocation. In this case, the measurement technology is as if the introduction is possible only before the salesperson's choice of effort, and the equilibrium outcome (given the rest of our model) will be that measurement will not be introduced.
For an example from an academic setting, consider evaluating teaching effectiveness at universities through students' evaluations. Because it practically takes months to adopt or change the survey, teachers can adjust their teaching (e.g., making classes more entertaining instead of providing knowledge that students cannot immediately verify) concurrently with when the administration starts collecting the evaluations. In this case, in equilibrium, we have the benchmark case if measurement is not introduced. For another example, consider the management decision of whether to provide per-diem reimbursement of travel expenses (a set amount per day, no receipts required) versus reimbursing all reasonably necessary expenses (but requiring receipts). The latter can be viewed as measurement of allocation of expenses. Clearly, if the salesperson was not told to keep meal receipts, it would be hard to collect them later.
The above examples illustrate how, depending on the measurement technology, management may be able to commit to not measuring in some situations, and, in those cases, employees may know that there is no measurement. On the other hand, in some situations, if past records or surveys about the past can be used for measurement, it could be that even though measurement is detrimental for the organization's objectives, it will occur in equilibrium because of the inability of management to commit to not measuring.
5. Model Variations
5.1. Precise Measurement
In the main model, we assumed that the x component of effort can be measured only probabilistically. In this section, we show that the main results that an introduction of measurement could decrease profits and social welfare also hold if the measurement is precise, that is, if after introduction of the measurement, x can be directly observed. Formally, instead of m(x) defined by (3), assume m(x) x. When a 0, if x can be observed, then the type is revealed as far as high-type salespeople choose a positive x. Therefore, measurement introduction may lead to effectively full information about types and no distortion. In this case, the first-period profit is the same as in the benchmark model, and the second-period net profit increases because of the better identification and retention of high-type salespeople. We therefore consider a more general case of a  [0, 1) and show that the main results hold for sufficiently high a.

If a > 1/4, the efficient choice x 1 of high-type

salespeople may not identify them as the high type

because 2 a. If

the no

low-type incentive

salespeople can mimic x up to is provided in the first-period

contract, choose x

>in2eaqutiolibcrreiudmib,lyhsiigghn-atyl ptoe

salespeople the firm that

will they

are of the high type. Thus, with an infinitesimally

positive weight on 1 in the first-period contract, the

unique type to choose

xcehqouo2ilsiebareif.ufiCmclieesanartlleyxs,pfoerrsaaonoannstdlryafstoelriggtyhhteilsyhfiaogbrhotthvyeep1leo/tw4o,

this results in a higher total net profit because the

detriment of a slight effort distortion by the high-type

salespeople in the first period is more than offset by

a higher profit in the second period. However, for a close to ah 1, the tradeoff is reversed: the benefit of identifying a salesperson's type tends to 0 as a tends

to 1, but the effort distortion and, therefore, its detri-

ment to the firm increase. The firm is then interested in

preventing the effort distortion of the high types.

The two possibilities of reducing effort distortion of

the high-type salespeople are (1) to provide a sufficient

incentive for the high-type salespeople not to separate

from for a

tchheoliocwe -otyf pxe<o2nesa,

that is, to (perhaps

offer compensation contingent on the

value of 1) sufficient for the high types not to be willing to separate by choosing x above 2 a, and

(2) offer an incentive for lower x designed to make the

low-type salespeople unwilling to mimic the high

type's choice. The first possibility would result in

a pooling equilibrium. It turns out (see the online ap-

pendix) that it is always suboptimal (i.e., it results in

total net profits lower than those without either mea-

surement or the second strategy listed above). The

second possibility would result in the separating

equilibrium because a high-type salesperson values

more being recognized as such. (An increase in the

second-period contract's weight on 2 1 is valued more by the high-type salesperson because he is more likely to

achieve 2 1.) The firm would benefit in the second period, but at the cost of the incentive paid to the low-type

salespeople in the first period. It turns out that the net effect

is always negative (see the online appendix for details).

Let us now consider the possibility that the salespeople

know their second-period outside option z before de-

ciding on their first-period profit allocation. As in the

corresponding consideration in the main model, if no (or

negligible) incentive is given in the first-period contract,

half of the high-type salespeople (those with z < 1/2) will

then distort their effort allocation to separate from the low

type. Alternatively, if the incentive is given for the low

type to not try to mimic the high type, then half of the

high-type salespeople (the ones with z > 1/2) will take on

the offer and distort their x1 down. Therefore, the increased social welfare in the second period will come at

a cost of the decreased one in the first period. Unlike in the

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

81

main model, neither upward nor downward distortions are maximal. The upward distortion in the absence of a nonnegligible incentive in the first-period contract is to choose x1 2 a, whereas the downward distortion is under the control of the firm. Which will be preferable to the firm depends on the relative magnitudes of these distortions. The online appendix presents a formal analysis and establishes the following proposition.
Proposition 3. Introduction of a precise measurement of one of the components of effort decreases profits when the difference in salespeople's abilities is not very high. Furthermore, introduction of the precise performance measurement may decrease the total welfare.

5.2. Measurement of Effort in Both Periods
In this section, we investigate what happens when the measurement of component x can be done in both periods. In other words, we consider the analysis of the previous section with the added possibility of m(x2) also being available. As we will see, this brings additional complexity into the analysis without affecting the main messages of the previous section. For analytical tractability, we perform this analysis focusing on large b.

5.2.1. Unexpected Measurement Introduced After the

First Period's Effort Allocation. Consider first the case

in which there is an unexpected introduction of the

measurement after the first period's effort allocation. Just

as in the analysis of Section 4.2, in the second period,

uncertainty about the salesperson's type remains only

if m(x1) 0. In this case, if m(x2) is also observable, and absent

concerns about the second-period effort allocation, the

principal may want to put a positive weight on the second-

period measurement for a better retention of the high-

type salespeople. This is so when m(x2) is informative of the salesperson's ability on top of the information

derived from the first-period observables (1 and m(x1)) and the second-period profit realization 2. If effort is efficiently allocated in the first period, this would be

when 1 1 and m(x1) 0 (otherwise, first-period ob-

servations reveal the type). Thus, one can expect a

strictly positive weight on 1m(x2) contract when (and only when)

1 in the m(x1)

second-period 0.18 The only

reason that this weight may not be positive is if it could

lead to a second-period effort allocation distortion and

the manager finds this suboptimal. The outcome of

this tradeoff depends on the probability of the sales-

person being of a high type: if this probability is lower,

the benefit of identifying the high type (and not spend-

ing on the low type) is higher.

Similarly to the proof of Proposition 2, for any

positive incentive on m(x2), as b  , a high-type

salesperson will distort the effort allocation in the
second period maximally. Because maximal distortion
leads to zero productivity, for large b, the weight on m(x2) must be small, and, therefore, most of the pay comes from the weight on 2. (Clearly, a weight on 2 is better than a constant component, so the constant will
not be used.) Thus, asymptotically, the second-period
outcomes are as if the measurement did not exist in the
second period; that is, the results of Section 4.2 apply
here asymptotically for large b.
For an illustration, consider the objective function of a high-type salesperson who has a contract c212 1(1 + w2m(x2)) for some c2 > 0 and w2 > 0. If the salesperson chooses effort allocation x2, his expected compensation is

w2e

(b

+

x2(2

- x2)) 1 1+b

+

w2

x2 2

c2.

(14)

The first-order condition with respect to x2 implies that the optimal x2 is

x2

min

2,

2w2 - 2 +

(2w2 + 1)2 + 3(1 + w22b) 3w2

.

(15)

Note that for larger and larger b, if w2 is small, the

optimal

x2

approaches

1

+

1+b 4

w2.

Using

the

decision

rule given by (15), we can now write the first-order

conditions with respect to c2 and w2 on the secondperiod profit in the case {1 1 and m(x2) 0} using the

probability of the high type given in (9). The analysis

is presented in the online appendix. For b 10, we

can obtain c2 0.20 and w2 0.02, resulting in x2 1.05.

5.2.2. Unexpected Measurement Introduced After the
First-Period Contract but Before the First-Period Effort
Allocation. In this case, exactly as in the case of Sec-
tion 4.3, all salespeople maximally distort their effort allocation in the first period. The first period's measurement m(x1) is then fully informative about the salesperson's type, and, thus, exactly the same outcomes follow. Note that in the first period, salespeople may expect the second-period offer following m(x1) 0 to have some positive weight on m(x2), but because any significant weight on m(x2) will result in the maximal distortion (for sufficiently large b) and, therefore, zero expected profits, the second-period offer that the salespeople may expect following m(x1) 0 is strictly worse than the second-period offer that they expect following m(x1) 1, which is 1/2 · 12 1. Therefore, the maximal effort distortion in the first period guaranteeing m(x1) 1 is strictly optimal for the salespeople. Again, note that the first-period profit loss due to this distortion in the first period is 1/2.

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

82

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

5.2.3. Measurement Introduced Before the First-Period
Contract. In this case, it follows from the results in the previous section that the firm will want to prevent maximal distortion. As the second-period offer given no distortion is asymptotically the same as if the measurement in the second period did not exist, the results of Section 4.4 hold here asymptotically. We thus confirm all the results of Propositions 1 and 2, except that the firm uses the second-period measurement for retention in a small amount.
6. Discussion
One may find it curious to reflect on the Finnish education achievement puzzle from the point of view offered by the above model. As demonstrated by eventual student abilities, Finland was able to improve performance by largely eliminating both the teacher and student performance measurements (see Darling-Hammond 2010).
A tenure system may also be considered as a commitment to limit the use of measurements. For example, a standard justification for lifetime appointments of justices is that otherwise they could be swayed by unscrupulous decision makers. Our research puts it in a different light: even if the supervisors are fully benevolent (they have only the objective of maximizing public welfare) and are fully rational, they may not be able to not interfere and not distort the socially efficient decisions of the salespeople.
The considerations illustrated by the model easily apply to not-for-profit organizations. In such organizations, the productivity/output () in fact may not be observable at all in the absence of measurement, yet the organization cares about it by definition. Note that any measurement of efforts or productivity components might have the property of not being completely unbiased between the different components of output, that is, almost always under- or overweigh one type of the input efforts. Furthermore, both the employees and the management of such organizations may have pride in their work, which leads to the employees preferring to optimize  absent other incentives (in the model, because of a small weight on the total output of the firm). The management, although by definition interested in the "good deeds"  brought to the society, also prides itself in the amount of work done by its particular organization, and therefore values the retention of the productive (i.e., high-a) employees.
Note further that retention by itself is not necessarily socially desirable. In the model we formulated, it is efficient (socially desirable) to retain a salesperson if and only if the salesperson's outside option z is less than the productive output a he can generate. Therefore, it is efficient to offer better contracts (higher base pay) to those salespeople who are expected to be more productive. As we have shown, the firm may be worse

off, although the salespeople and the social welfare are better off, in our model when the principal is willing and able to incentivize salespeople not to distort their effort allocations in the first period (although social welfare is lower in the model variation where salespeople observe their second-period outside offers before the first period). However, another interpretation is that z comes from the idiosyncratic salesperson preferences for outside attributes such as job location plus a job offer from an organization with exactly the same production function. In this case, given equal pay (contracts), salespeople would produce the same a's but realize the best possible location choices; that is, the location-inconvenience cost would be minimized. Salesperson retention then makes utility generated by locations inefficiently distributed while only shifting a's between organizations. Then the management's work (introducing measurements and fine-tuning contracts) could make both the organization and, on average, the salespeople worse off (although some salespeople may be better off). The model can then be most strikingly characterized as exploring the tug of war between the salespeople's pride in their work being a force toward an efficient society and the managerial pride in their work being a force against efficiency and toward a distortion of both the salespeople's effort allocation and salesperson locations.
Practitioners use various metrics of performance measurement (for an overview, see, e.g., Anderson and Oliver 1987). Some of them are output based (e.g., sales, growth, customer satisfaction, and evaluation by colleagues or supervisors), whereas others measure effort components (behavior or the process; e.g., product knowledge, services performed, number of active accounts, calls made, amount of correspondence, or days worked). Most directly, this paper relates to the pitfalls of the latter measurements, although some output measures can also be more or less directly linked with a component of effort.
Of course, in many other situations, the problem of effort inducement and salesperson retention is the main problem an organization faces, and the problem of optimal effort allocation between unobserved (not wellmeasured) components is not as essential. In those cases, performance measurements could benefit the organization and an average salesperson. The point of this paper is not that performance measurement is always or even usually counterproductive, but that it could be, and hence one should consider the implications of measurement before its introduction. In other words, one should have an idea of how to use the data before collecting them.
This paper assumes that one effort dimension can be measured costlessly, whereas the other effort dimension cannot be measured, which can also be interpreted as it being infinitely costly to measure or

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

too noisy to provide any useful information. More broadly, one could consider the problem of the firm of which effort dimensions to try to measure given their different measurement costs and different levels of informativeness of the noisy measure. In this setting, one may expect that the firm may prefer to measure effort dimensions that are measured more precisely or are measured at a lower cost. The investigation of this general problem is left for future research.
Acknowledgments Comments by Navin Kartik and Michael Raith are gratefully appreciated.

Appendix
Second-Period Contract and Profit in the
Benchmark Case
Because the outside option in the second period is positive and uniformly distributed on [0, 1], the salesperson has a positive chance of leaving and a positive chance of staying given any reasonable offer. (Because profit is either one or
negative, the optimal contract cannot provide expected utility to the salesperson that exceeds the outside option with probability one.) Consider now the second period's contract C2 c1 + c212 1, where c1  0 and c2  0 are the firm's decision variables and are functions of the observables after the first period (i.e., functions of 1). Thus, in this benchmark case, c1 and c2 may be functions of the first period's profit realization and are nonnegative to ensure a nonnegative compensation in any possible outcome.19
Given this contract, the expected pay of the salesperson with ability ai is c1 +c2(b + ai)/(1 + b) if the salesperson chooses the efficient effort allocation, which is assured by c2 > 0. Because the outside option is uniformly distributed on [0, 1], this expected pay is also the probability that the salesperson stays. The expected gross second-period profit from the type i salesperson who is staying and allocating his effort optimally for the firm is 1 - (B + 1)(1 - ai)/(b + 1), which leads to the expected net second-period profit of 1 - c1 - c2 - (B + 1 - c2)(1 - ai)/(b + 1). Letting the probability that the salesperson is of the high type be Ph, one can then compute that the expected net second-period profit as a function of Ph is

E(2 - C2)

(1 - c1 - c2)(c1 +c2) Ph

-

c1

+

B

- b + bc2 1+b

c1

+

c2

1

b +

b

(1 - Ph).

(A.1)

Maximizing the above expected profit with respect to c1 and c2 under the constraint that c1  0, we find that the constraint c1  0 is binding (first-order condition without the constraint leads to negative c1), and given c1 0, the optimal c2 is as in Equation (4).

Suboptimality of Partial First-Period Distortion Consider the high-type agent's first-period effort allocation decision x1 given the first-period contract c11 1andm(x1) 0 and

83

tb2h-bBe1ex1 p-eBcatneddm(sxe1)co0n. dT-hpeerisoadleosfpfeerrs12o1mn('xs1

)

1 + c211 value of

1andm(x1) 0
increasing

+ x

above x 1 is coming from the increased probability of

m(x1) 1 and the associated second-period equilibrium pay increase from c2 to 1/2:

Benefit x - 1 (1/2)2 - c22 . 22 2 2

(A.2)

This benefit comes at a cost of lower expected first-period pay,

Costfirst period

1 2

-

b 1

+ +

 b

1

-

x 2

c,

where 

x(2 - x),

(A.3)

and of the possibility that the compensation is reduced from

c2

to

b-B 2b

(event

{1

-B and m(x1)

0} becomes possible),

which decreases salesperson's expected utility by

Costsecond period

1- 1+b

1

-

x 2

c2 2

-

(b

- B)2 8b2

.

(A.4)

Subtracting the two costs from the benefit, we obtain the salesperson's objective function as

f (x, c)

(x - 1)

1 + b + 4(x2 - 3x - b + 1)

c

2 2

+

2c

1 16

+ (2 - x)(x - 1)2(1 - B/b)2 1+b

. (A.5)

This yields f (x, c)

0 at x

1. At c

c



1 8

-

c~

2 2

2

,

it simplifies to

f (x, c )

-(x

-

1)2

(2 - x)(1 - 16(1 + b)

B/b)B/b,

(A.6)

which clearly achieves the maximum (of 0) at x 1 and x 2. Thus, the incentive that is just enough to prevent the salesperson from preferring no distortion to maximal distortion makes the salesperson strictly prefer no distortion to any intermediate distortion. Furthermore,

f

(x, c

c)

<

0

and

2f (x, c) c x

<

0

for

x  (1, 2].

(A.7)

In other words, f (x, c) decreases in c, and the speed (by ab-
solute value) of this decrease increases in x. This implies that if for some x1 < x2, we have f (x1, c1)  f (x2, c1), then for any c < c1, we have f (x1, c) < f (x2, c). Applying this to c1 c and x2 2, we obtain that for any smaller incentive than c (i.e., for c < c ), we have that the effort allocation x 2 is preferable to any effort allocation x  [1, 2). Conversely, any incentive larger than c results in x < 1.

Proof of Proposition 1. We have already established that it is always optimal for the firm to incentivize no first-period effort allocation distortion through a positive weight on 1 1 and m(x1) 0 instead of allowing effort distortion. This implies that it will be optimal to do so if other contract structures
are allowed. (Recall that we have not considered allowing a contract with a positive weight on 1 1 and m(x1) 1 when b  4.) This immediately implies that social welfare increases
if measurement is introduced. Let us now compare incentivizing less upward distortion
of x1 with a positive weight on 1 1 and m(x1) 0 versus a

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

84

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

positive weight on 1 1 and m(x1) 1. The first strategy

(per unit of the weight) provides a higher incentive to reduce

x1 from any value above the optimal x1 1, but the second strategy is cheaper for the firm as it results in no payments to

the low-type salespeople (because they can never achieve

m(x) 1). Therefore, although the second strategy is poten-

tially optimal (only for low b, because it is counterproductive

for b > 4), allocating all the weight toward the first strategy

would be optimal if the firm was able to avoid payment to the

low-type salespeople.

Let us then establish an upper bound on the firm's profits

with measurement by using this lower bound on the cost of

the first strategy above; that is, assume that the total ex-

penditure on the wages coming from the weight c on 1 1

and m(x1)

0

in

the

first

period

will

be

not

1+3b 4(1+b)

c

but

4c.

In

this case, as we have argued above, it will be optimal not to

use any weight on 1 1 and m(x1) 1 in the first-period contract. The firm will still use the minimal c required to

incentivize no distortion, that is, c c. The first-period profit

with

measurement

will

be

c~ 4

lower

than

that

without

mea-

surement (because of the cost of wages), and the second-

period profit will be higher than the one in the benchmark

case by b4B2/[8(b2 + b + 1)(2b + 1)(b3 + (b + 1)3)], which is

smaller

than

c~ 4

for

all

b

>

B.

Therefore,

measurement

always

decreases profits, and the proposition is proven.

Proof of Proposition 2. If measurement is introduced and the firm provides minimal incentives not to distort effort allocation in the first period, all high-type salespeople with z < 1/2 will distort their x1 maximally upward to guarantee themselves the second-period offer 1/2 · 12 1, and the rest will choose an efficient effort allocation and leave. This salesperson strategy will result in the firm having full in-
formation about the types of salespeople who might stay but at the cost of inefficiently low profit in the first period.
Let us estimate how much the firm may be willing to spend on preventing the high-type first-period effort distortion and,
consequently, how many salespeople may be, in equilibrium,
prevented from the maximal distortion of their effort allocation in the first period. For this purpose, we will ignore the secondperiod benefit of the first-period effort allocation distortion
(without the distortion, some high-type employees end up with 1 1 and m(x1) 0 and are pooled with the low-type salespeople), thereby deriving an upper bound on the firm's
willingness to prevent effort allocation distortion and, there-
fore, a lower bound on the mass of high-type employees with z < 1/2 who distort their x1 maximally upward.
To discourage upward distortion of x1, the firm may put a positive weight on 1 1 and, additionally, possibly a negative weight on m(x) 1. We therefore consider the firstperiod contract of the form p11 1(1 - w m(x1)). Given this contract, the expected first-period pay of a high-type salesperson for x1 x is (b + (2 - x)x)(1 - w x/2)p/(b + 1). Checking when the derivative of this with respect to x is negative on x  [0, 2] when b > 4, we observe that the optimal choice of a high-type salesperson who is sure to leave is x 0 if w  4/b.
Facing the maximal effort distortion of the high-type salespeople with z > 1/2, the firm would prefer to instead have salespeople with z > 1/2 not distort their effort allocation
from the optimal one (x1 1) at all, while having the rest of the salespeople distort the effort allocation maximally upward

(i.e., choose x1 2). Because the latter outcome is achieved with the (near) zero-pay contract, a contract with w  4/b

cannot be optimal. Thus, the optimal contract must have

w < 4/b. Furthermore, because of the benefit to the firm of

a high-type salesperson's not distorting effort in the first period

is

at

most

1-

b-B b+1

Bb++11, and only half of high-type salespeople

will distort with the (near) zero-pay contract (which is a quarter

of all salespeople), the firm will not be willing to pay more

than

1 4

B+1 b+1

in

the

total

first-period's

wages

to

all

salespeople.

On the other hand, the above contract will result in the total

expected expenditure on the first-period wages higher than

1 2

b b+1

p

+

1 2

b b+1

(1

-

4 b

)p

b-2 b+1

p.

Therefore,

in

the

optimal

con-

tract, p < 4(Bb+-12).

Now, fix salesperson

waritbhitrthareysexc1on[d0-,p2e)r,ioadndouctosnidseidoepr tiaonhizgh-t1y/p2e.

If m(x1) 1, the second-period contract provides this salesperson the expected second-period pay of 1/2. On the other

hand, in either event {m(x1) 0 and 1 -B} or {m(x1) 0 and 1 1}, the firm has to believe that the probability that the salesperson's type is high is at most 1/2/(1/2 + b/2/

(b + 1)) (b + 1)/ (2b + 1). Substituting this upper bound on

the probability of high type into Equation (7), we obtain that

the salesperson's second-period wage increases by at least

b2B/[2(2b + 1) (b2 + b + 1)] if m(x1) increases from 0 to 1. Therefore, increasing x1 from x1 to 2 increases the expected pay (conditional on the salesperson accepting the offer) in

the second period by at least b2B/[2(2b + 1)(b2 + b + 1)] with probability (1 - x1/2) and never decreases it. (Once x1 2, the expected pay is 1/2 for sure.) The salesperson values this

expected increase in the second-period offer by at least

1

-

x1 2

min

1 2

-

z

,

2(2b

+

b2B 1)(b2

+

b

+

1)

.

(A.8)

Let us now consider an upper bound on the salesperson's firstperiod cost of such adjustment of x1 due to its effect on the firstperiod pay for b > 4. Given the upper bounds established above
on p and w, when the salesperson chooses x1 2 instead of x1 x1, his expected first-period income decreases by

b

+ x(2 - b+1

x) p

1

-

wx 2

-

b(1 b

- +

w) 1

(2

-

x)

w

b

+ 2x - w 2(b + 1)

x2

p



(2

-

x1

)

4(b - 2) (b + 1)b

p



(2

-

x1

)

(bB++11)b,



for

b



8,

(A.9)

where the first inequality follows from maximizing w b + 2x - w x2 over x  [0, 2] and w for b  8 and w  4/b. Let b be such that

4(2b

+

b2B 1)(b2

+

b

+

1)

>

(bB++11)b,

for b > b.

(A.10)

Such b exists because the left-hand side is of the order B/b

and the right-hand side is of the order B/b2 as b  .

Comparing the benefit and the cost of full distortion to the

high-type salesperson with z < 1/2, we then obtain that for

b > b, the benefit outweighs the cost if 1/2 - z > 8((bb+-12))bp. Thus,

high-type

salespeople

with

z

0,

1/2

-

8(b-2)p (b+1)b

will be maxi-

mally distorting their x1 upward.

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

85

Let us now revisit the upper bound on the optimal p

established at the beginning of the proof of this proposition.

We have used an estimate of the potential benefit of p > 0

coming from preventing the distortion of high-type salespeople with z < 1/2. However, for b > b, as we have shown

above, the maximal distortion may be possibly prevented

only for salespeople with z  [1/2 - 8((bb+-12))bp, 1/2]. The ratio of

the mass of these high-type employees to all employees is

4((bb+-12))bp. We thus have that for b > b, the upper bound of the benefit (to the firm, relative to the minimal incentives in the

first

period)

is

4(b-2)p (b+1)b

B+1 b+1

instead

of

1 4

Bb++11.

Comparing

this

to

the lower bound on the first-period wage costs established

above (bb+-12 p), one obtains that for b(b + 1) > 4(B + 1) (which is always true for b > 4), the lower bound on the cost outweighs

the potential benefit. Therefore, minimal incentive in the first period is optimal for b > b defined above. As we have already

noted, minimal incentives result in all high-type employees

with z  1/2 allocating effort efficiently, and all high-type

employees with z < 1/2 maximally distorting their x1 upward. This establishes the first two parts of the proposition.

We now turn to the calculation of the effect of measure-

ment on the profits and the social welfare for large b, specifically, for b > b defined above. The net profit without

measurement is derived in the main text (see Equation (7) and the sentence that precedes it). If b > b, the total expected net

profit with measurement equals

1 2

+

1 2

·

b b

- +

B 1

+

1 2

1 2

3 4

+

b-B 2(b + 1)

in the case of a high-type salesperson, and equals

(A.11)

b b

- +

B 1

+

b b

- +

B 1

-

pay

· pay

(A.12)

in the case of a low-type salesperson, where "pay" is the ex-

pected

payment

in

the

second

period,

which

is

b b+1

b-B 2b

2(bb-+B1).

Averaging the above two expressions, we obtain the profit

with measurement. Subtracting it from the profit without

measurement, we obtain that measurement reduces profit by

4b3B - B2b2 + 4b3 - B2b + 6b2



+ 6b2B + 6b + 6Bb + 2B + 2 8(b + 1)(1 + 2b)(1 + b + b2)

+ o(1/b)

B+1 4(b + 1)

-

8(2b

+

1)(b2

bB2 +b+

1)

+

o(1/b),

(A.13)

which is positive for large b (as far as b > B). The social welfare without measurement can be calculated
as the average welfare of the low-type and high-type salesperson scenarios. If the salesperson is of the low type, the welfare is

WLNoM

b b

- +

B 1

+

b

b +

1

b b

- +

B 1

·

c21L

+

1

- c221L 2

+

b

1 +

1

b b

- +

B 1

·

c20L

+

1

- c220L 2

,

(A.14)

where c21L is the expected pay of the low-type salesperson in

the second period if 1 1, c20L is his expected second-period

pay if 1 -B, and NoM stands for no measurement. We have

c2iL

b b+1

c2i,

where

c2i

is

the

equilibrium

wage

conditional

on

the first-period profit given by Equation (6). The above equation represents the expected first-period profit plus the probability of 1 1 times [the expected second-period profit gross of wages times the probability of acceptance (which is the event z < c21L) plus the surplus coming from the outside option in case of rejection] plus the similar term representing the event of 1 0. If the salesperson is of the high type, the social welfare is

WHNoM

1+1·

c21

+

1

- c221 2

+0

(1 + c21)(3 - c21). 2 (A.15)

This is derived in the same way as the previous equation, but it is much simpler because Prob(1 1 | high type) 1, and the expected second-period pay of the high type given wage c · 12 1 is c.
If the measurement is introduced (and b > b), the salespeople with z < 1/2 fully distort their effort allocation in the first period, and those with z > 1/2 allocate effort efficiently and leave in the second period. Furthermore, the high-type salespeople with z < 1/2 are then recognized as the high types, receive a second-period wage offer of 1/2, and stay. Therefore, if the salesperson is of high type, the expected welfare is

WHm

1

·

1 2

+

1 2

·

b b

- +

B 1

+

1

-

(1/2)2 2

+

1 2

11 8

+

1 2

b b

- +

B1,

(A.16)

where the first two terms represent the expected profits in the

first period (coming from those with z > 1/2 and z < 1/2,

respectively), and the last two terms represent the expected

social welfare in the second period (coming from those with

z > 1/2 and z < 1/2, respectively). The low-type salespeople

are identified by the measurement precisely and, therefore,

receive the value at c2L

sec2o(bbn-+Bd1)-.pTehrieordefworaeg, ethoeffseorcoiaflb2-wbBe1lf2ar1e,

which they conditional

on low type is

WLm

b b

- +

B 1

+

b b

- +

B 1

c2L

+

1

- c22L 2

(3b

-

B

+ 2)(5b - 8(b + 1)2

3B

+

2).

(A.17)

Averaging the two social welfare equations above, we obtain

Wm

3 16

+

3 16

(3b - B + 2)2 (b + 1)2

.

(A.18)

Subtracting the above from the social welfare without measurement, we obtain that the welfare without measurement is greater by

8b3B - 3B2b2 + 8b3 - 3B2b + 12b2B

W

+ 12b2 + 12Bb + 12b + 4B + 4 16(b2 + b + 1)(2b + 1)(b + 1)

B+1 4(b + 1)

-

16(b2

+

3B2 b + 1)(2b

+

1)

>

0,

for b > B, (A.19)

which concludes the proof of the proposition.

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

86

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

Endnotes
1 We thank the associate editor for the suggestion of this example.
2 Even if long-term contracts are possible, unless management can commit to not giving out bonuses (which are not fully spelled out in the contract), the implicit nature of incentives remains present.
3 This measurement of one of the components can potentially be made with noise.
4 Management can offer long-term contracts, but the problem is that once management sees evidence of high ability, and given the probability that salespeople will quit, it will then offer retention bonuses to some salespeople; that is to say, a commitment to never use the measurement is not renegotiation-proof. One could also envision "slavery contracts" that commit salespeople to work forever. Although such contracts would solve the issue of commitment (because retention is no longer an issue), they would result in inefficiency because, due to the random outside options (if they are not perfectly predictable by the salespeople), sometimes it is efficient for a salesperson to leave. From a profitability standpoint, such contracts would come at the expense of offering higher base salaries up front. Thus, the negative value of measurement would persist even if slavery contracts were allowed.
5 See, for example, Basu et al. (1985), Rao (1990), and Raju and Srinivasan (1996). See also Godes (2003) on how to use different types of salespeople.
6 Some measurement can also be obtained on the market conditions by allowing lobbying by salespeople on the incentive scheme (e.g., Simester and Zhang 2014).
7 For a discussion of this literature, please see Bolton and Dewatripont (2005, chapters 9 and 10).
8 To avoid potential incentives for salespeople to signal high ability through refusing a first-period offer to gain a higher compensation in the second period, assume that the firm does not engage in hiring at all in the second period. From the equilibrium that we derive, such signaling will also not be optimal in this setting.
9 Another possibility to explore, not considered here, is cheap talk reports by the salesperson about his ability (see, e.g., Ambrus et al. 2013; in the advertising setting, see, e.g., Gardete 2013 and Gardete and Bart 2018).
10 This measurement structure simplifies the analysis. In Section 5.1, we also consider the case of precise measurement, m(x) x, which yields similar results.
11 The term 1condition is the indicator function; it takes the value 1 if the "condition" is true and takes the value 0 otherwise.
12 Note that the assumption of a relatively low retention rate (relatively high outside option) forces the profit to be low in the second period, because of both the low retention probability and the extra expenditure on salesperson compensation. However, reducing the upper bound on the outside option would complicate the analysis, as it would require considering the boundary case of the retention probability equal to one under a potentially optimal contract. One possibility to bring the first- and second-period profits closer--without changing the effects presented--would be to consider z to be a mixture of zero and the uniform component (i.e., a mass point at zero and the rest of the distribution still uniform on [0, 1]).
13 The case when the second-period contract can also be conditioned on the second period's measurement realization m(x2) is considered in Section 5.2.
14 The benefit will be even higher if the firm expects a distortion toward x > 1, because in that case the high-type salesperson is better identified, and, therefore, the second-period contract offer following m(x1) 0 will be even lower, whereas the offer following m(x1) 1 will be the same and equal to c2 1/2. 15 Note that not everything is the same in the second period: Given the salesperson strategy, the firm optimally updates its belief about the outside option of the salespeople based on the profit and performance

measurement realization. Effectively, m(x1) 0 signals that the salesperson expects a high outside option or is of low ability. But if the firm

then decides to increase the second-period offer in this case to 1/2 · 12 1 or greater, the total profit becomes less than if the firm just committed to

having the second-period wage 1/2 · 12 1 regardless of 1, which obviously results in a total profit lower than in the benchmark case.

16 For a high-type salesperson, the probability of the outcome {1 1 and

m(x1)

1}

is

x1 2

b+x1 (2-x1 1+b

),

which

is

increasing

in

x1

 [0, 2]

when

b  4.

17 Another possibility is due to different incentives needed for em-

ployees with different ability levels. This results in equilibrium

distortion when a > 0. However, the analytical expressions are much more complex when a > 0, and, numerically, we were unable to find parameter values that led to lower equilibrium social welfare due to

the measurement introduction.

18 Note that this could look like a special treatment for apparent

(i.e., as measured) substandard salespeople to "encourage im-

provement." This is not exactly the case because achieving m1(x1) 1 does not lead to lower expected compensation in the second period

for retention reasons.

19 Although c2 < 0 is technically allowed as long as c1 + c2  0, it is straightforward to check that it cannot be a part of an optimal

contract--it would give an incentive to inefficiently allocate effort

without the benefit of higher retention of high-type salespeople.

References
Akerlof G (1970) The market for "lemons": Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. Quart. J. Econom. 84(3):488­500.
Ambrus A, Azevedo EM, Kamada Y (2013) Hierarchical cheap talk. Theoret. Econom. 8(1):233­261.
Anderson E, Oliver RL (1987) Perspectives on behavior-based versus outcome-based salesforce control systems. J. Marketing 51(4):76­88.
Basu AK, Lal R, Srinivasan V, Staelin R (1985) Salesforce compensation plans: An agency theoretic perspective. Marketing Sci. 4(4):267­291.
Bolton P, Dewatripont M (2005) Contract Theory (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA), 367­486.
Bond P, Gomes A (2009) Multitask principal-agent problems: Optimal contracts, fragility, and effort misallocation. J. Econom. Theory 144(1):175­211.
Coase R (1972) Durability and monopoly. J. Law Econom. 15(1):143­149. Corkery M (2016) Wells Fargo fined $185 million for fraudulently
opening accounts. New York Times (September 8), B1. Crémer J (1995) Arm's length relationships. Quart. J. Econom. 110(2):
275­295. Darling-Hammond L (2010) Steady work: Finland builds a strong
teaching and learning system. Rethinking Schools 24(4):30­35. Desai P, Purohit D (1998) Leasing and selling: Optimal marketing
strategies for a durable goods firm. Management Sci. 44(11):S19­S34. Dewatripont M, Jewitt I, Tirole J (1999) The economics of career
concerns, part I: Comparing information structures. Rev. Econom. Stud. 66(1):183­197. Forbes Coaches Council (2018) Want to keep your best salespeople? Eight retention strategies that work. Forbes (February 5), https:// www.forbes.com/sites/forbescoachescouncil/2018/02/05/want-to -keep-your-best-salespeople-eight-retention-strategies-that-work/ #6576627368c3. Gardete P (2013) Cheap-talk advertising and misrepresentation in vertically differentiated markets. Marketing Sci. 32(4):609­621. Gardete P, Bart Y (2018) Tailored cheap talk: The effects of privacy policy on ad content and market outcomes. Marketing Sci. 37(5):733­752. Godes D (2003) In the eye of the beholder: An analysis of the relative value of a top sales rep across firms and products. Marketing Sci. 22(2):161­187. Hauser J, Simester D, Wernerfelt B (1994) Customer satisfaction incentives. Marketing Sci. 13(4):327­350.

Kuksov and Villas-Boas: Performance Measurement Trap

Marketing Science, 2019, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68­87, © 2019 INFORMS

87

Holmstrom B, Milgrom P (1991) Multitask principal-agent analyses: Incentive contracts, asset ownership, and job design. J. Law Econom. Organ. 7(Special Issue):24­52.
Kydland F, Prescott E (1977) Rules rather than discretion: The inconsistency of optimal plans. J. Political Econom. 85(3):473­491.
Laffont JJ, Tirole J (1988) The dynamics of incentive contracts. Econometrica 56(5):1153­1175.
Likierman A (2009) The five traps of performance measurement. Harvard Bus. Rev. 87(10):96­101.
Malcomson J, Spinnewyn F (1988) The multiperiod principal-agent problem. Rev. Econom. Stud. 55(3):391­408.
Prat A (2005) The wrong kind of transparency. Amer. Econom. Rev. 95(3):862­877.
Raju JS, Srinivasan V (1996) Quota-based compensation plans for multi-territory heterogeneous salesforces. Management Sci. 42(10):1454­1462.

Rao R (1990) Compensating heterogeneous salesforces: Some explicit solutions. Marketing Sci. 9(4):319­341.
Reichheld FF (2003) One number you need to grow. Harvard Bus. Rev. 81(12):46­54.
Rocco RA (2017) 2015­2016 sales effectiveness--Sales acceleration survey. Research summary brief, Driehaus College of Business, DePaul University, Chicago.
Sager JK (1990) How to retain salespeople. Indust. Marketing Management 19(2):155­166.
Simester D, Zhang J (2010) Why are bad products so hard to kill? Management Sci. 56(7):1161­1179.
Simester D, Zhang J (2014) Why do salespeople spend so much time lobbying for low prices? Marketing Sci. 33(6):796­808.
Zoltners AA, Sinha P, Lorimer SE (2008) Sales force effectiveness: A framework for researcher and practitioners. J. Personal Selling Sales Management 28(2):115­131.

