http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/mksc

MARKETING SCIENCE
Vol. 40, No. 1, January­February 2021, pp. 147­167 ISSN 0732-2399 (print), ISSN 1526-548X (online)

A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House

Jungju Yua
a Department of Marketing, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong Contact: jungjuyu@cityu.edu.hk, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7817-2203 (JY)

Received: December 22, 2017 Revised: December 14, 2018; December 20, 2019; March 18, 2020 Accepted: May 14, 2020 Published Online in Articles in Advance: October 5, 2020
https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2020.1245
Copyright: © 2020 INFORMS

Abstract. Some firms that operate in multiple product markets use the same brand in different markets, whereas others use different brands in different markets. This research investigates in which product markets a firm should use the same or different brands and how this decision depends on the relatedness of product markets. To answer this question, I propose a framework of market relatedness that characterizes the relationships among distinct product markets from the supply side (e.g., shared production technology) and demand side (e.g., correlated customer preferences). This framework is applied to a model of reputation in which a multiproduct firm's product quality is jointly determined by its hidden capability type (i.e., adverse selection) and hidden choice of effort level (i.e., moral hazard) in each product market. Consumers obtain noisy information about the firm by observing its track record, that is, product quality produced in the past. Umbrella branding allows consumers to pool the firm's track record across different product markets and form expectations about the product quality based on market relatedness. The analysis shows that umbrella branding is optimal if supply-side relatedness is high and demandside relatedness is not too high. However, if the product markets are closely related in both dimensions, then independent branding may be optimal because, as an umbrella brand, the firm faces a temptation to exploit positive information spillover across product markets through its shared brand name. By using different brand names, a firm can credibly commit to investing in all product markets and thereby earn higher profits. Finally, this paper provides implications for an umbrella brand's customer relationship management strategy whether to serve the same or distinct customer segments with its products.

History: Ganesh Iyer served as the senior editor and J. Miguel Villas-Boas served as associate editor for this article.
Supplemental Material: The online appendix is available at https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2020.1245.

Keywords: umbrella brands · market relatedness · house of brands · branded house · firm reputation · CRM

1. Introduction
Many firms operate in multiple product markets while seeking opportunities to further expand their product portfolio. When a firm enters a new product category, one of the major challenges it faces is the decision of whether to use an existing brand or a different brand. A brand is a firm's most valuable intangible asset, so a firm with a reputable brand will want to leverage that asset by using its existing brand. For example, Honda first established its brand with motorcycles and later used the same brand to enter other markets, such as automobiles, lawnmowers, and several different categories of power equipment. Chanel sells a variety of products under its brand, such as apparel, accessories, cosmetics, and fragrances. This practice of housing different products under the same brand leads to a brand architecture called a branded house or, more commonly, umbrella branding. Through the common brand name, consumers can easily associate the firm's different products with one another.

However, some other firms use new brands when they enter new product markets, even though they possess strong existing brands. For instance, Procter & Gamble (P&G) has several brands in different product markets, such as Tide for laundry detergent, Crest for toothpaste, and Pampers for baby diapers. Similarly, Unilever has several distinct brands, such as Dove, Lipton, and Hellmann's. This branding strategy results in a house of brands or, alternatively, independent branding. Because different brands are used in various product markets, most lay customers of these product brands are not aware that they are produced by the same firm. Given the significance of successful brand management, firms must choose between umbrella branding and independent branding optimally.1
Umbrella branding is different from independent branding in that, in the former, the shared brand name establishes an association between different products produced by the same firm. As it is easy for

147

148

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

them to recognize the association between products, consumers can draw inferences about a product quality based on the brand's performance in other product markets. Through consumers' inferences across markets, an umbrella brand induces reputation spillovers. However, if the firm adopts different brands for its products, many consumers will be unaware of the association between the products. Therefore, consumers will be much less likely to draw inferences across product markets.2 For example, in the wake of the Volkswagen scandal, in which the company was found to have cheated on carbon emissions tests for diesel engine models, sales of not only its diesel but also its nondiesel models suffered.3 On the other hand, models of the Audi brand, also owned by Volkswagen, fared better than Volkswagen models. Therefore, these key trade-offs through reputation spillover induced by umbrella branding should be analyzed carefully to understand a firm's optimal branding decision.
These trade-offs of umbrella branding have been studied in the literature (e.g., Wernerfelt 1988, Cabral 2000, Miklo´ s-Thal 2012, Moorthy 2012), and a main takeaway is that a firm's mere adoption of umbrella branding can credibly signal high quality, because if a firm were not of high quality, then it would not risk its brand assets by placing the same brand name on multiple products, each of which may fail and induce negative reputation spillovers. Thus, only a high-quality firm would benefit from using umbrella branding. However, in reality, some high-quality firms, such as P&G, deliberately choose independent branding, a puzzle for which the signaling story does not offer a satisfactory explanation.
This paper tries to provide an explanation for this puzzle and offer managerial implications for a firm's optimal branding decision by investigating how reputation spillover depends on the relatedness between product markets. The extent of positive and negative reputation spillover critically depends on market relatedness. For instance, a consumer looking to purchase a camcorder may rely on her experience with the same brand's camera, as a camcorder and a camera have some shared features, such as lenses, motion detection, and light adjustment. On the other hand, the same buyer will likely find it irrelevant to know the quality of the brand's unrelated products, such as handbags.
To conceptualize the relatedness between product markets, I propose a parsimonious framework of market relatedness, which captures stylized patterns. First, distinct product markets may be related through supply-side factors, which is called supply-side relatedness. For example, Honda has applied its key technologies in making engines in different product categories that require engines. The more production

technologies are shared, the more correlated the firm's capabilities in producing high-quality products in different markets are. Therefore, for a firm using an umbrella brand, consumers will draw more inferences about the firm's ability to produce a highquality product in one market based on its track record in another market. Thus, the extent of reputation spillover is determined by supply-side relatedness. However, if the firm uses different brands, then consumers will be unaware of the association between different products, and therefore unable to draw inferences across markets.
Second, firms such as Chanel may serve similar target segments across different product markets, perhaps because their target segment has correlated preferences for different products in fashion and beauty. Therefore, Chanel, which has a profound understanding of the preferences of its target customers, finds it profitable to cater to the needs of its target segment in various product markets, such as apparel, handbags, sunglasses, jewelry, and even perfume. Therefore, these products may be related through the shared customer bases, which is denoted as demand-side relatedness. The higher the demandside relatedness is, the more likely consumers are to interact with the firm in multiple product markets. Through their interactions, they will have access to more information about the firm.
Based on these stylized patterns, the relationship between two product markets is characterized in two dimensions: the supply side and demand side. This framework of market relatedness, which fundamentally influences how consumers observe and infer from information about the firm, is applied to a model of reputation in which product quality is jointly determined by the firm's hidden characteristic (i.e., how capable the firm is) and hidden actions (i.e., how much effort it exerts). This modeling integrates two distinct approaches in the extant literature on umbrella branding in which quality is determined by either the firm's hidden characteristic or hidden action. This approach is intended to capture how product quality is determined in reality. Even companies with great capabilities, such as Volkswagen, are tempted to save costs at the expense of sacrificing product quality. When a firm's great capability is complemented by self-discipline to exert its best efforts, the firm can continue to produce high-quality products and maintain a good reputation.
Key ingredients of the model are as follows. In each product market, a monopolist can be either competent or incompetent. In each period of an infinite-timehorizon game, a competent type can, unlike an incompetent one, make a costly investment in quality to increase the probability of producing a high-quality product. In the beginning of each period, one short-

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

149

lived consumer who prefers a high-quality product arrives but does not observe the realized quality in the same period. Instead, the consumer observes the firm's realized quality in the previous period and updates the consumer's beliefs about the firm's hidden capability types, as well as the current realized quality. Thus, a competent type can differentiate itself from an incompetent one by investing in quality and producing high-quality products. If consumers believe that competent types invest in quality, then they will make positive inferences from a firm's good track record about its capability type and reward the firm by paying a greater price for its product. This upfront reward will, in turn, provide incentives for the competent type to continue to invest in quality if this reward is greater than the investment cost. If the brand names in two product markets are the same, then consumers can pool the firm's track record across product markets.
Given the crucial effect of branding decisions on consumers' beliefs, this paper investigates a firm's optimal branding decision by comparing the best feasible profits under independent branding and umbrella branding. This comparison boils down to whether each branding regime can sustain the most profitable equilibrium, which is referred to as the high-effort equilibrium (HE). In this equilibrium, the competent type always invests in quality, and therefore maximally differentiates itself from the incompetent type. Accordingly, consumers pay the highest prices in this equilibrium.
The analysis shows that umbrella branding is optimal for high supply-side relatedness if demand-side relatedness is low. However, the result can be different if demand-side relatedness is high; that is, independent branding can be optimal if both demandside relatedness and supply-side relatedness are high. The intuition behind this finding is as follows. An umbrella brand used for highly related product markets can induce an excessive amount of information spillover across product markets. In particular, consumers who observe the firm's good track record in one market will make positive inferences about the firm in another market. Then, the firm is tempted to exploit this positive information spillover by investing in only one product market instead of exerting its best efforts in both markets.4 Given this temptation, consumers do not trust the firm to invest in quality in both markets. Accordingly, they are no longer willing to pay as high a price, which negatively affects the firm's profits. The firm can resist the temptation to exploit the positive reputation spillover by adopting independent brands, which will eliminate reputation spillover across product markets. Therefore, through independent branding, the firm can credibly communicate

to consumers that it will exert its best efforts in both product markets.
The results provide new insights into how firms should choose between independent branding and umbrella branding on the basis of how related the product markets are. Interestingly, the benefit of independent branding as a disciplinary mechanism can be the greatest when the two product markets are closely related on both supply side and demand side. Moreover, the findings of this paper provide an explanation for why some high-quality firms, such as P&G and Unilever, may avoid umbrella branding and still manage to maintain several successful brands; the decision to use different brands may contribute to the continued success of brands by providing additional incentives for firms to invest in each brand.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses related literature. Section 3 presents the model setup and framework of market relatedness. Section 4 analyzes the model and investigates a firm's optimal branding decision. Section 5 explores an umbrella brand's optimal customer relationship management (CRM) strategy for whether to target the same or distinct customer segments with its different products. Section 6 concludes the paper. The proofs of all results are presented in the appendix and the online appendix.
2. Related Literature
Umbrella branding has become a productive area of marketing and economics research. The approach in the present paper draws on a prevalent economic view of branding as a vehicle of information about a firm. In the existing literature, depending on which type of information is communicated through branding, there are two distinct approaches to umbrella branding.
In one approach, a brand can be used to communicate a firm's hidden characteristic, its quality. A monopolist is given an exogenous quality type, which determines the product quality. Then, consumers' expectations of a brand correspond to their posterior beliefs about the firm's quality type.5 Analyzing adverse selection models, this stream of research has documented that the mere decision to adopt umbrella branding can be a signal of high quality. Wernerfelt (1988) was the first to show that an umbrella brand can signal high quality in all product markets. This result relies on two key assumptions: the first assumption is that introducing a new product as an umbrella brand costs more than introducing it as an independent brand, and the second assumption is that the most pessimistic off-equilibrium beliefs are imposed on consumers who believe a firm to be of low quality for both products if any one product turns out to be bad.6 However, subsequent research finds that

150

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

the signaling effect of umbrella branding may not be robust if these assumptions are relaxed. In particular, Moorthy (2012) shows that such a result can only hold under a very stringent set of conditions. According to Miklo´ s-Thal (2012), umbrella branding can signal a positive correlation in the quality of its different products so that a firm whose products are both high quality or both low quality chooses umbrella branding.
In another approach (e.g., Andersson 2002, Hakenes and Peitz 2008, Cabral 2009), a brand conveys information about the firm's hidden action, that is, its choice of an effort level, either high (costly) or low (costless). More specifically, product quality is determined by the firm's effort choice unobserved by consumers. In such a moral hazard model, a brand serves as an implicit contract in which consumers believe the firm to choose high effort if it has always produced good outcomes. In turn, consumers' beliefs provide the right incentives for the firm to always choose high effort, as long as the cost of investment is sufficiently low and the discount factor is sufficiently large.7 In these models, consumers' beliefs about the firm's choice of effort level are arbitrarily imposed by researchers, and the scope of the implicit contract is sensitive to which beliefs are imposed.8 Moreover, the firm cannot gradually improve or exploit consumers' beliefs through its choice of effort level. Instead, the best possible reputation can arise or be stripped away altogether, depending on the imposed beliefs.9
This paper integrates two existing approaches to umbrella branding by analyzing a model of reputation with both a firm's hidden type (exogenous capability type) and hidden action (endogenous effort decision) in the spirit of Mailath and Samuelson (2001). Based on the firm's record of past quality, consumers form expectations about both of the firm's unobservables which jointly determine the quality of the present. In turn, the firm decides whether to exert effort or not given the consumers' expectations. A more capable type can build up its reputation by making a costly investment or squander it by not investing. This paper extends the model of Mailath and Samuelson (2001), who analyze a model for a monopolist in a single product market, to investigate a firm's reputation in multiple product markets. A prominent theme in this stream of research is whether the efficient equilibrium (or the HE in this paper) in which the competent type always exerts high effort can be sustained. Over an infinite time horizon, as consumers accumulate near-perfect information about the firm's type, the marginal return to the firm from an additional costly effort is very small such that such an equilibrium unravels. However, in Mailath and Samuelson (2001), an HE exists if the firm ownership is replaced with a positive probability, where the replacement is unknown to consumers. Ho¨ rner (2002)

shows that in a duopoly market, competition can also discipline each firm's behavior and sustain the equilibrium. Liu and Skrzypacz (2014) analyze a model with limited consumer memory and demonstrate that a firm's reputation can fluctuate over time. In a study related to this paper, Neeman et al. (2019) explore a model with limited memory and show that forming a collective brand with another firm can help sustain the HE. This paper also assumes consumers' limited memory and investigates the effects of the firm's branding decision and market relatedness on the HE.10
Previous research experimentally documents that relatedness between an existing and a new product is an important basis for consumers' evaluation of the new product (e.g., Aaker and Keller 1990, Boush and Loken 1991). Park et al. (1991) find that, depending on the perception of brands--for example, functional (Timex) versus prestigious (Rolex)--there could be different bases of market relatedness through which a brand could be extended more successfully. Miklo´ sThal et al. (2018) propose a different micromodel of supply-side relatedness that captures an idea similar to the one explored in this paper, that is, a firm's capabilities in distinct markets may be correlated. Their focus is on the firm's optimal product strategy. This paper provides a microfoundation for market relatedness on both the supply side and demand side and investigates how market relatedness affects a firm's decision of whether to adopt umbrella branding.
3. Model and Equilibrium
3.1. Model Setup
A long-lived monopolist sells two experience goods, one in each of the two product markets A and B, over a discrete infinite time horizon (t 1, 2, . . .). The product quality in each period is a random variable, the realization of which can be either high quality (H) or low quality (L). In each market i  {A, B}, the firm is either persistently competent (i C) or incompetent (i I), depending on whether it has the capability to produce a high-quality product. In each period, a competent type can invest in quality at cost c > 0 to produce a high-quality product (H) with probability  > 0. Otherwise, if it does not invest in quality, the firm will always produce a low-quality product (L). On the other hand, an incompetent type is incapable of producing a high-quality product regardless of whether it incurs an investment cost or not.11 Thus, realized quality is a joint and noisy outcome of the firm's capability type and its investment decision. The distribution of the firm's capability types in the two product markets  (A, B) is represented by Pr(A, B), which yields the marginal distribution of the firm's type in each product market Pr(i C) 0  (0, 1).

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

151

In every period, one short-lived representative con-

sumer is drawn from a pool of consumers and interacts

with the firm in that period. The consumer (sometimes

referred to as she) may or may not have a unit demand

in each of the two product markets, each event oc-

curring with probability 1/2. In each market in which

she has a unit demand, the consumer receives zero

utility from a low-quality product (L) and positive

utility from a high-quality product (H) normalized to

one. She does not participate in the market in which

she has no unit demand. Because the firm sells ex-

perience goods, the consumer does not know the

realized quality of the product before purchase. She

knows neither the firm's persistent capability type in

each market (i) nor its investment decisions. Instead,

the consumer in period t observes the realized quality

experienced by a consumer in the previous period, denoted by ht-1 (hAt-1, hBt-1).12 If the previous con-
sumer makes a purchase in market i, then the con-

sumer in the subsequent period will observe a track

record of either a high-quality (H) or low-quality (L)

product. However, if no product is purchased, then

the track record will be Ø. Thus, the firm's track record in each market available in period t is hit-1  * : {H, L, Ø}.

Whether the firm uses umbrella branding or in-

dependent branding, denoted by br  {umb, ind}, has

a profound influence on how consumers observe and

infer from the firm's track record. If the brand names

in the two markets are the same (br umb), then

consumers can readily recognize that the two prod-

ucts are produced by the same firm. Therefore, they

are able to use the information in both product
markets hAt-1 and hBt-1 and make a purchase decision in each market. However, if the brand names are dif-

ferent (br ind), then it will be costly for consumers to

establish the association between the two products.

To capture this fundamental distinction between in-

dependent branding and umbrella branding, con-

sumers are assumed to be unaware of an association

between two products if their brand names are dif-

ferent. Consequently, a consumer facing an inde-

pendent brand will interact with the firm in each

product market independently; that is, only the firm's track record in the same market is relevant.13

The consumer arriving in each period observes the

firm's track record and whether the brand names are

the same or different. As the consumer is short lived,

she behaves myopically. If she has a unit demand in

product market i, it is assumed that she pays her

expected

utility.14

It

is

assumed

that

 2

>

c,

which

implies that an investment in quality is an efficient

action because each consumer has a unit demand in

each market with probability 1/2.

The sequence of the game is as follows. At t 0, the firm's persistent capability types  (A, B)  {C, I}2

in the two product markets are realized. In each period t  1, the firm decides whether to make a costly investment in quality in each product market. Then, one short-lived consumer arrives and interacts with the firm in each product market in which she has a unit demand.15 The consumer observes the realized quality experienced by the consumer in the previous period ht-1  *2 and makes purchasing decisions. The quality of each purchased product ht is publicly realized. Then, the consumer leaves and the period ends.
3.2. Strategy and Equilibrium Concept
The price that a consumer pays is determined by her posterior beliefs about the firm's unobserved capability type, which is determined by the firm's track record. Thus, Markovian pure strategies in which the firm's investment strategy depends only on the payoff-relevant state are considered.16 More specifically, an investment strategy of each type  (A, B)  {C, I}2 is a mapping from the firm's track record h (hA, hB)  *2 to a decision whether to invest in each product market i, denoted by i(h)  {0, 1}. An incompetent type has a trivial strategy to never invest in quality because its costly investment does not lead to a better outcome. Thus, the firm has a nontrivial investment decision to make only if it is competent in at least one product market. The (C, C)-type firm makes an investment decision in each market, corresponding to the strategies denoted by AC,C(h) and BC,C(h). If the firm is competent in only one market, then it has only one decision to make in each period: AC,I(h) and BI,C(h).
In period t, the consumer updates her beliefs about the firm's capability types in each product market based on the firm's track record ht-1 and branding regime br  {ind, umb}. Given the firm's track record, the posterior distribution of the firm's capability types is Pr(A, B|ht-1; br).17 From this posterior distribution, the consumer's posterior beliefs about the firm's capability types in both product markets can be computed. For instance, the consumer believes the firm to be competent in product market A with probability
A(ht-1; br) Pr(C, C|ht-1; br) + Pr(C, I|ht-1; br). (1)
Similarly, the consumer's posterior belief about the firm in product market B is B(ht-1; br) Pr(C, C|ht-1; br) + Pr(I, C|ht-1; br).
If the consumer has a unit demand in product market i  {A, B}, then she pays her expected utility, which coincides with the expected probability of receiving a high-quality product. Only a competent type can produce a high-quality product with probability  > 0 if it chooses to make an investment in quality. Thus, if the consumer in period t has a unit

152

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

demand in market i and observes a track record ht-1, then she pays the following price:

pi(ht-1; br)



(

Pr(A,

B

|ht-1

;

) br

A,B{C,I} )

· iA,B (ht-1) · .

(2)

Otherwise, if she does not have a unit demand, then

she does not pay a nonnegative price, and no trans-

action occurs. Therefore, it is as if pi(·) 0, and no outcome (Ø) is generated.18

 The
i{A,B}

firm's pit - c ·

per-period dit, where dit

profit  {0, 1}

in period t is t denotes whether the

firm makes an investment in quality (dit 1) or not

(dit 0) in period t and market i. Note that the firm's

current investment decision dit is not observed by the

current consumer and, therefore, affects the incurred

investment cost and not the price. The firm's payoff in

the future is discounted by discounted payoff in period

 t is

(0, Vt

1),so
st

its s-t

present · s.

The equilibrium of this game is defined as follows:

(i) given the strategy of all other types, an investment

strategy of each type , A (ht-1) and B(ht-1), maximizes the firm's present discounted payoff at each

track record ht-1  * × *; (ii) each consumer pays pit(ht-1; br) whenever she has a unit demand in market i; and (iii) the consumer's beliefs are consistent with

the firm's equilibrium strategy and updated using

Bayes' rule. Note that an equilibrium of this game is a

perfect Bayesian equilibrium with Markovian refinement.

The game admits multiple equilibria. For instance,

the firm's strategy to never invest (i(·)  0) and consumers' beliefs consistent with this strategy are

always part of an equilibrium for any c > 0. In this

equilibrium, which is referred to as the low-effort

equilibrium (LE), only low-quality products are pro-

duced. Thus, consumers always pay a price of zero,

which, in turn, eliminates the firm's incentives to

invest in quality. Therefore, the profit of a firm of any

type  is zero in this equilibrium.

An efficient equilibrium is dubbed the HE, in which

the firm always invests in each market where it is

competent. The investment strategy in this equilibrium is represented by i(·)  1 whenever i C. By making costly investments, the competent type can

produce a high-quality product with a positive proba-

bility (). The firm's track record will be observed by

the consumer arriving in the next period, so the

competent type can differentiate itself from the in-

competent type. Then, each consumer will pay a

higher price to a firm with a better track record based

on her rational expectation that a competent type

will, in fact, invest in quality. Expecting this future

reward, the firm may find it optimal to indeed invest

in quality even though its current investment decision

is unobserved by the consumer. A consumer pays the highest price in this equilibrium for each history compared with any other equilibrium, which makes it the most profitable equilibrium unless the investment cost is prohibitively high.19
This paper compares the best feasible equilibrium in independent branding and umbrella branding and identifies the optimal branding regime. The analysis shows that this comparison hinges on which of the two branding regimes can sustain the HE. Accordingly, Section 4.1 first establishes conditions under which the HE exists under each branding regime by analyzing the two regimes separately. Then, Section 4.2 more formally examines the firm's optimal branding decision by analyzing an extended version of the current game in which the firm makes a branding decision at t -1 before the current game begins.
This paper abstracts away from signaling through a firm's branding decision, a topic that has already been extensively studied in the extant literature. This means that consumers in the current model do not draw information from the mere fact that the firm chose a particular branding. The purpose of this approach is to preclude complications from potential signaling through branding decisions, which allows the paper to focus on the firm's track record as the main channel through which the firm can convey information about quality and thereby manage its own reputation.
3.3. Belief-Updating Process A consumer in each period makes inferences about the firm's private capability types on the basis of its track record in the two markets, depending on the consumer's prior beliefs and her rational expectations about the firm's equilibrium investment strategy. Importantly, consumers' belief updating also depends on the firm's branding regime (whether the brand names are the same or different) and market relatedness (how related the product markets are on the supply side and the demand side).
3.3.1. Branding Regime and Market Relatedness. If the firm uses the same brand, then the extent of information pooling across product markets is determined by the market relatedness. Based on observed patterns of multiproduct firms, a conceptual framework of market relatedness is proposed.
One pattern is that a firm sometimes applies its key supply-side technologies to multiple product markets. For example, Honda makes a range of products, such as motorcycles, automobiles, lawn mowers, and air jets, that all require engines. Canon's lens-making technology is used for its cameras, camcorders, scanners, projectors, and digital radiography devices. In such cases, the firm's distinct products are related through

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

153

their shared technologies or key product attributes.

This supply-side relatedness implies that a firm's

capability to produce high-quality products in dif-

ferent markets will be positively correlated. The supply-

side relatedness between product markets is captured

through a joint distribution Pr(A, B) satisfying two

properties: first, the marginal distribution of the firm's

type in each market is Pr(i C) 0, and second, the firm's capability types in two product markets can

be positively correlated, as represented by a param-

eter   [0, 1]. Accordingly, the types are distributed

as follows:

( ( ))

Pr(C, C) (0  + )(1 - ( 0 , )(

))

Pr(I, I) 1 - 0  + (1 -  )1( - 0)

Pr(C, I) Pr(I, C) 0 1 - 0 1 -  .

(3)

For example, if  0, then the firm's types in the two

markets are independent, whereas if  1, then they

are perfectly positively correlated. Note that Pr(C, C)

and Pr (I, I) increase in , whereas Pr(C, I) Pr(I, C)

decreases. Thus, as  increases, the firm's capability

types in two markets are more likely to be the same.

If the firm uses the same brand, then consumers ac-

count for the correlation and accordingly make in-

ferences across product markets. Otherwise, if the

brand names are different, then consumers are un-

aware of the association between the two products

and are thus unable to account for the correlation.

Therefore, for an independent brand, the effective  perceived by consumers is zero.20

Another observed pattern is that firms sometimes

serve similar target segments in distinct product

markets, which is widely practiced by fashion or

lifestyle brands such as Chanel and Ralph Lauren.

These companies have a profound understanding of

their target segments to whom they find it valuable to sell

multiple products, ranging from clothes and handbags

to sunglasses and perfumes. Then, a firm's different

products that may seem unrelated in terms of pro-

duction technology are, in fact, related through a shared

customer base. This demand-side relatedness is captured

by parameter   [0, 1], which represents the extent of

the shared customer base across two product markets.

More specifically, in each period, one consumer is

randomly drawn from a unit mass of consumers and interacts with the firm. With probability 2, the consumer has a unit demand in both markets. The con-

sumer has a unit demand only in product market A

with

probability

1- 2

and

only

in

market

B

with

the

same probability. The consumer has no demand with

the remaining probability of 2. Thus, the demand-side

relatedness determines the distribution of the con-

sumer's unit demand and amount of information

about the firm generated. If it is high (or if  is large),

then each consumer is more likely to make a purchase

in both product markets or neither product market. In the former, information about the firm will be realized
in both markets, whereas in the latter, no information
will be realized. This formulation of demand-side relatedness satisfies two features. One, the mass of
consumers interested in both products is increasing in . Two, the total expected demand is one in each period, 1/2 in each product market, and thus independent of .21

3.3.2. Posterior Beliefs. In the current period, a consumer observes the firm's track record ht-1 (hAt-1, hBt-1)  * × *, which was experienced by the consumer in the previous period. Based on the firm's
track record, the consumer updates her beliefs about
the firm's private capability types. In doing so, the
consumer also accounts for her rational expectations
about the firm's equilibrium investment strategy.
Given this paper's focus on the HE, the posterior beliefs within this equilibrium are presented.22 In the
HE, a firm's investment strategy in each product
market is determined by the firm's capability type in that market. Therefore, i(ht-1; br) defined in (1) is sufficient to characterize the consumers' posterior beliefs.23

Belief Updating for an Independent Brand. Under in-
dependent branding, consumers' posterior beliefs
about the firm's type in market i depend only on the information in the same market, hi, and are independent of the information in the other market, hj
( j i). For example, the posterior beliefs in product market A given for any hBt-1  * are as follows:

A(H,

hBt-1

;

) ind

( 0 ) 0 + 1 - 0 · 0

1,

A(L,

hBt-1

;

) ind

0 0(1 -

(1 - ) ) + 1 -

0

,

(4)

and A(Ø, hBt-1; ind) 0. Only a competent type can produce a high-quality product. Therefore, upon observing a firm's track record of a high-quality product, consumers learn that the firm is competent in that market, that is, A(H, hBt-1) 1. A bad track record can be caused by a competent type with probability 1 - 
or by an incompetent type with probability 1. There-
fore, consumers account for the distribution of com-
petent and incompetent types in the market and compute the posterior probability that the firm is competent. If there is no track record available for the firm in
the market, then the posterior beliefs are the same as
the prior.

Belief Updating for an Umbrella Brand. Under umbrella branding, even if the firm has no track record in a product market, consumers can use its record in

154

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

the other market to update beliefs about the firm's unobserved capability type. If the observed track record is good, then consumers draw more optimistic inferences. Similarly, if the track record is bad, this leads to more pessimistic posterior beliefs about the product in the other market. The extent of crossmarket inferences is determined by the supply-side relatedness (), which enters through the prior joint probability distribution Pr(A, B). For example, upon observing histories (hA, hB) (Ø, H), (Ø, L), and (Ø, Ø), the respective posterior beliefs are as follows:

A(Ø, H; umb)

Pr(C,

C)

·



Pr(C, C) ·  + Pr(C, I) · 0

+ +

Pr(C, I) Pr(I, C)

· ·

0 

+

Pr(I,

I)

·

0

,

A(Ø, L; umb)

(Pr(C,

C)

+

Pr(C, C) · Pr(I, C)) ·

(1 - (1 -

) )

+ +

Pr(C, I) · (Pr(C, I)

1 +

Pr(I,

I))

·

1

.

Clearly, A(Ø, Ø; umb) 0. A track record (Ø, H) could have been produced by two types of firms--(C, C) and (I, C)--because the firm has to be competent in market B to produce a high-quality product. Between these two types, only the (C, C)-type firm is also competent in market A. Therefore, the posterior probability of the firm being competent in market A is obtained by dividing the probability that the (C, C)-type firm produces a track record (Ø, H) by the total probability of realizing the same track record.
The discussions thus far on the consumer's posterior beliefs under independent branding and umbrella branding can be summarized as follows:24
Lemma 1 (Belief Updating). For any hA, hB  *, the consumer's posterior beliefs about the firm's capability type in market A satisfy the following properties:
i. Direct information effect: A(H,hB;br) 1  A(Ø, hB;br)  A(L,hB;br).
ii. No information spillover for an independent brand: A(hA, hB; ind) is independent of hB, that is, A(hA, H; ind) A(hA, Ø; ind) A(hA, L; ind).
iii. Information spillover within an umbrella brand: A(hA, H; umb)  A(hA, Ø; umb)  A(hA, L; umb), where A(hA, H; umb) is increasing, and A(hA, L; umb) decreasing, in .
The lemma illustrates the effect of the firm's track record, good or bad, on the customer's posterior beliefs in the same market and in the other market. If the firm's track record in a market is good, then the firm is believed to be competent in the same market with probability 1, that is, A(H, hB; umb) 1. This belief will lead the consumer to pay the maximal price. On the other hand, even if the firm's track record in a market is not good, a good outcome in another market A(hA, H; umb) may spill over, and the

extent of which is determined by the supply-side relatedness. Accordingly, the consumer may pay a greater price in both markets than she would have otherwise.
The demand-side relatedness () determines the distribution of available information about the brand. If this relatedness is high, then each consumer is more likely to have a unit demand in both product markets. Therefore, it is more likely that there is information available about the firm in both product markets, in which case there is more information to be pooled across markets. At the same time, the probability that the consumer buys neither product also increases, so it becomes more likely that no information about the firm is available in both markets. However, if  is small, then it becomes more likely that a consumer buys either product, so information about the firm will be available in only one of the two product markets.
The posterior beliefs affect the price that each consumer pays, as shown in (2). In the HE, i(h) 1 whenever i C, so pi(h; br) i(h; br) · . The price is increasing in the consumer's posterior beliefs, which indicates that a competent type firm has an incentive to invest in quality; a costly investment may generate a good track record, resulting in greater prices in the future.

4. The Optimal Brand Architecture
This section compares the best feasible profits in the model of independent branding and umbrella branding. This comparison turns out to depend on each branding regime's scope of the HE, the most profitable equilibrium. Section 4.1 characterizes the conditions under which the HE exists for each branding regime. Section 4.2 analyzes a game in which a firm makes its branding decision at t -1 before the current game begins. In particular, the section characterizes all pure-strategy equilibria and identifies the equilibrium branding decision.

4.1. The High-Effort Equilibrium

4.1.1. Independent Branding (House of Brands). If the

brand names are different in different markets, con-

sumers are not able to associate the firm's two product

markets, so the analysis boils down to a market-by-

market investigation. In the HE, the firm always in-

vests in quality if it is competent in the market. The

firm's investment decision determines the distribu-

tion of realized quality, which is observed by the

consumer in the next period and affects the continuation payoff. Given a track record ht-1 (hAt-1, hBt-1), a firm of type  (A, B) expects a per-period profit

pA

(ht-1

;ind)+pB 2

(ht-1

;ind)

-

c

·

(A

(ht-1

)

+

B

(ht-1

)).

Depending

on the firm's investment decisions in both product

markets, the new outcomes ht (hAt , hBt ) will be realized, the distribution of which is denoted by Pr(ht|).25

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

155

Given the new outcomes, the continuation payoff is V(ht;ind). Therefore, the firm's value function must satisfy

V(ht-1; ind)

pA(ht-1; ind) + pB(ht-1; ind)

-

c

·

(A (ht-1

2 )

+

B

) (ht-1)

+  · Pr(ht|) · V(ht; ind). (5)

ht *2

The HE exists if and only if the firm has no profitable deviation from the equilibrium strategy. According to the one-shot deviation principle, it is necessary and sufficient to rule out any profitable one-shot deviation in which the firm deviates in one period and thereafter returns forever to the equilibrium strategy. If a firm is competent in only one market ( (C, I) or (I, C)), then it can deviate in only that market. A firm that is competent in both markets ( (C, C)) can deviate in one or both markets. However, the firm's considerations for these two types of deviations are identical in independent branding because the firm's decision in one market has no effect on its decision in the other market. In other words, the firm will deviate in both product markets if and only if it is optimal to deviate in each market independently.
For a deviation in one market, without loss of generality, a deviation in market A is examined, which implies that A C, so  (C, B). Then, the payoff from the deviation is denoted and defined by

( V ht-1;

ind,

dAt

) 0

- c · B(ht-1) +  ·

pA(ht-1; ind) + pB(ht-1; ind)



( Pr ht

|,

2 dAt

) 0 · V(ht; ind)

ht *2

where Pr(ht|, dAt 0) is the distribution of realized quality in period t as a result of the firm's deviation in

market A. Compared with the equilibrium payoff in (5),

the firm can save its investment cost in market A.

However, the lack of an investment results in a bad
outcome in market A (i.e., hAt L), which leads to a worse probability distribution of new outcomes, re-
flected in Pr(ht|, dAt 0). Thus, the firm expects a lower continuation payoff in this deviation than on

the equilibrium path. Therefore, this deviation is not
profitable, that is, V(ht-1; ind)  V(ht-1; ind, dAt 0), if and only if the cost of investment is less than the

gain in the continuation payoff:

c < cind :

·



( Pr(ht|)

-

( Pr ht|,

dAt

)) 0

ht *2

· V(ht; ind),

(6)

where   {(C, C), (C, I)}. The right-hand side is the marginal effect of the firm's investment in market A

on the continuation payoff, which leads to the following remark.

Remark 1. The firm's decision of whether to invest in a product market in period t is independent of the track record of the firm (ht-1).
This independence is because the consumer in the current period does not observe the realized quality. Thus, the firm's investment decision does not affect the current-period prices but, rather, affects only the continuation payoff. The HE exists if (6) holds for   {(C, C), (C, I)}.

Proposition 1. For independent branding, the HE exists if and only if c  cind, where

cind



·



·

pA(H,

hBt

;

) ind

-

pA(L,

hBt

;

) ind

2(

)

2



· 4

·

1 - 0 1 - 0 ·

 

,

(7)

for any track record hBt  *. The existence of the HE does not depend on the two-dimensional market-relatedness parameters  and .
The proposition shows that the necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of the HE is a cutoff rule. The larger the threshold cost level cind for independent branding is, the greater the scope of the HE. The proposition illustrates that the threshold can be expressed as a weighted sum of the price premium that the firm can enjoy in the future as a result of its current investment in quality. This price premium is captured by pA(H, hBt ; ind) - pA(L, hBt ; ind). Thus, in return for a costly investment, the firm can produce a highquality product, which will be observed by the consumer in the next period. This consumer will update her beliefs accordingly, so the firm can expect a greater price pA(H, hBt ; ind) in the next period instead of pA(L, hBt ; ind).
Given that consumers facing independent brands cannot associate the firm's different products, it is straightforward that the threshold level does not depend on the two-dimensional relatedness parameters. By adopting different brands, the firm can effectively mute the effects of market relatedness, ensuring that consumers treat each product independently.
The threshold cost level is increasing in , the success probability of a competent type's investment in quality, which is intuitive because if  is large, then each investment in quality is more effective in generating a good outcome, thus directly amplifying the firm's investment incentives. This fact also implies that each outcome is more informative about the firm's capability types. Therefore, a large  indirectly increases cind through the consumer's belief ((11--00·)). Moreover,

156

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

cind decreases in 0, and vanishes at 0 1. In this model, a good outcome reveals the firm to be com-
petent, whereas the effect of a bad outcome on the consumer's posterior beliefs is not as extreme. If the consumer's prior beliefs about the firm's unobserved capability type are already optimistic (or, 0 is large), then the firm receives less marginal benefits from an investment in quality.26

4.1.2. Umbrella Branding (Branded House). If the firm uses the same brand for the different product markets, then its investment in quality in one product market can affect the future payoffs in both product markets because the consumer arriving in the next period will observe the outcome of the investment and make inferences across product markets. The above fact implies that, unlike in the case of independent branding, a market-by-market analysis is not appropriate for the case of umbrella branding.
Aside from these fundamental distinctions, the analysis for umbrella branding is similar to the analysis for independent branding. The HE in which a competent type always invests in quality exists if and only if there is no profitable deviation. This condition can be shown to be true if and only if c < cumb : min cumb,   {(C, C), (C, I), (I, C)}. The (C, C)-type firm can deviate in both product markets. However, intuitively, this deviation is too costly for the firm because it can only produce a low-quality product in both product markets, which will negatively affect the firm's continuation payoff. Instead, the firm finds it more tempting to deviate in just one product market, for example A, while investing in the other market B. This deviation will generate the threshold for the HE, cumb.

Proposition 2. For an umbrella brand, the HE exists if and

only if c < cumb, where the cutoff level is obtained by the

(C, C) type's deviation in a single product market, B. The

cutoff cost cumb is characterized as an expected premium in

price the firm may realize in the next period as a result of the

firm's current investment in product market A:



cumb

 2

·


hBt *

w(hBt

)

·

pA(H,hBt;umb)2-pA(L,hBt ;umb)

expected premiumin market A

+ pB(H,hBt;umb)2-pB(L,hBt;umb),

spillover in market B

Bw,hsearteiwsf(yhinBt )gisthhBtep*rwob(habBt i)lity1t.hat hBt is produced in market The threshold cost cumb corresponds to the marginal
benefit of the firm's investment in product market A

in the continuation payoff. The first part of the proposition identifies the deviation that characterizes cumb, where the (C, C)-type deviates in product market A. This is because the (C, C) type firm invests in product market B, which may result in a good outcome from which the consumer draws positive inferences in both product markets. As a result, the firm is tempted to deviate in product market A and instead exploit the positive reputation spillover from product market B. On the other hand, the (C, I) type does not face such a temptation because there is no positive spillover from market B to be exploited.
Clearly, the (C, C) type's deviation in market A will lead to a low-quality product, which will induce some negative spillover to market B. The fear of this negative spillover reduces, but cannot entirely offset, the firm's incentive to deviate, because a good outcome is a clear signal that the firm is competent, whereas a bad outcome is only a noisy signal that it may be incompetent. Therefore, the magnitude of positive spillover from market B to A will dominate the negative spillover in the opposite direction.
The extent of the reputation spillover depends on the supply-side relatedness (), as well as other model parameters, such as the demand-side relatedness (), the success probability of a competent type's investment (), and consumers' prior beliefs that the firm is competent in each market (0).

Proposition 3. For umbrella branding,

i. if the success probability of a competent type's in-

vestment

is

low

(



12),

then

 cumb 

>

0;

ii. if  > 12, then

a.

 cumb 



0

if

demand-side

relatedness

is

low

(



)

or the prior probability is large (0  ), so cumb is max-

imized at  1;

b.

 cumb 



0

if

demand-side

relatedness

is

high

(



)

and the prior probability is low (0  ), so cumb is max-

imized at  0; and

c.

 cumb 



0

for





^

and

 cumb 

<

0

for



>

^

for

^



(0, 1) if  >  and  < 0 < , or  <  <  and 0 < ,

and thus cumb attains its maximum at ^ .

The proposition shows how the scope of the HE for umbrella branding, proxied by cumb, depends on the supply-side relatedness . Whether cumb is mono-
tonically increasing, decreasing, or nonmonotonic in
 depends on model parameters , 0, and, importantly, .
The first part of the proposition states that if  is small (< 12), then a closer supply-side relatedness helps sustain the HE. Because the success probability of a
competent type's investment is low, competent and
incompetent types are less distinguishable in terms
of the distribution over realized outcomes. This fact

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

157

implies that the realized outcomes are less informative of the firm's unobserved capability types.27 Then, the firm is able to provide more information about its competence, especially if the supply-side relatedness is high.
On the one hand, if  > 12, the case depicted in Figure 1, then the realized outcome carries more information about the firm's capability types. Thus, there can be substantial information spillover across product markets. The proposition shows that, in general, if the demand-side relatedness is low ( < ), then higher supply-side relatedness helps sustain the HE. This case corresponds to the lightest gray region on the leftmost part of the x-axis, demand-side relatedness. On the other hand, if the relatedness is high on the demand-side ( > ), then high supply-side relatedness makes it more difficult to sustain the HE because an umbrella brand induces excessive information spillover across product markets. Therefore, the firm has a significant temptation to exploit the positive spillover across product markets instead of investing in both markets. In this case, a reduction in supply-side relatedness can provide more commitment power by limiting information spillover. Thus, a smaller  will expand the scope of the HE. The darkest gray region on the bottom right corner of Figure 1 represents this case. Based on this interaction between the supply-side relatedness and demand-side relatedness, cumb can be nonmonotonic in  if  is intermediate.
As discussed before, a firm's deviation in one product market will generate negative spillover, which may discipline the firm's temptation to deviate. The consumers' prior 0 dictates which of the two spillovers--positive and negative--will dominate, as graphically illustrated in Figure 2. If 0 is large, then there is little room to improve the consumer's beliefs about the firm's capability type. On the other hand, the beliefs can be updated more pessimistically if a bad track

Figure 1. The HE for Umbrella Branding and Supply-Side

Relatedness:

 cumb 

(

>

12)

Figure 2. The HE for Umbrella Branding and the Prior 0 ( 1,  0.7,  0.9)
record is observed. As a result, the disciplinary force induced by negative spillover dominates the temptation generated by positive spillover. Given that the firm's behavior is disciplined, it is better to generate more information through a closer supply-side relatedness. Therefore, as demonstrated by the bottom curve of Figure 2 cumb increases in . By contrast, if 0 is small, then the firm's good track record can affect the consumer's beliefs more optimistically. However, a bad track record cannot worsen the beliefs as much. Thus, the positive spillover dominates the negative spillover. Given that the firm's behavior is not disciplined, more information spillover will only increase the temptation to exploit the positive spillover, thus reducing the threshold for the HE. Consequently, as shown in the top curve of Figure 2, cumb decreases in . Finally, based on the two opposing forces that 0 imposes on the spillovers, if 0 is intermediate, then cumb is nonmonotonic in .
4.2. The Optimal Branding Regime This paper has thus far analyzed which of the two branding regimes can sustain the most profitable equilibrium, the HE. This section further investigates a firm's optimal branding decision between independent and umbrella branding by analyzing a game that includes the game defined in Section 3.1 as a subgame. In period t -1, the firm chooses a branding decision between the two branding regimes. Then, in period t 0, its type   {C, I}2 is realized. The subgame starting at t  1 is the same as the game defined previously.28
An equilibrium of this game consists of an equilibrium of the subgame and a firm's optimal branding decision given the equilibrium of the subgame. So, for instance, (ind, HE) will indicate an equilibrium in which the firm chooses independent branding at t -1 and, subsequently, both the firm and consumers play the HE. Consumers' beliefs in this game are the same as the beliefs in the subgame because a firm's

158

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

branding decision is made prior to realizing its pri-

vate capability types and, therefore, does not influ-

ence consumers' beliefs about the firm's type. Im-

portantly, we maintain the assumption that consumers

are still unaware of the association between the two

products if the firm chooses to use different brand names, that is, adopt independent branding.29 To

identify a firm's optimal branding decision at t -1,

the best feasible profits under the two branding re-

gimes must be identified and compared. This requires

an analysis of alternative equilibria of the subgame

besides the HE and the LE.

In any stationary equilibrium of the subgame, a

firm's profit can be summarized by the expected per-

period profit, which is a weighted sum over the firm's

profit in all possible track records. The stationary

distribution over the track records Pr(hA, hB; ) is

determined by the firm's capability types  (A, B).

Thus, the expected per-period profit in an equilibrium

characterized by strategies A(h) and B(h) is

E (br)



Pr(h;

)

·

(pA(hA,

hB;

) br

+

pB(hA,

hB;

) br

h*2
- c(A

(h)

+

B

)) (h) .

2

(8)

For instance, for the HE, i(h) 1 whenever i C. Thus, for  (C, C), the probability distribution is PazesrrfoHoElo(loØthw,eHrsw:; CPis,reC,H)tEh(aH1t-2,His·,;CP,,rPCrH)EH(EL2(,·ØØ,2;Ø,CP;,CrC,H)CE)(HP,rØ2·H;CE(,,ØCa,n)Ld; C, C) PrHE(L, L; C, C) 0. For the investment decision, CA,C(·) CB,C(·) 1. Distinct branding regimes yield different per-period profits because the consumer's beliefs are different, which leads to distinct prices.
Further analysis shows that, besides the HE and LE, the subgame can admit only two additional equilibria, which are dubbed the medium-effort equilibria (ME). Here, a competent type plays the HE in one market (for instance, A (·)  1 whenever A C) and the LE in the other market (B(·)  0). By symmetry, another ME exists where the firm plays the HE in product market B and the LE in product market A.

Proposition 4. The subgame admits four equilibria only: the HE, the LE, and two symmetric MEs. No other equilibria exist for the subgame.
Recall that the firm's strategy in each product market does not depend on its track record, as noted in Remark 1.30 The (C, C)-type firm has a binary investment decision to make in two product markets, and the (C, I)-type and (I, C)-type firms have one decision to make. Therefore, there are 24 16 possible

equilibria, only four of which can exist: the HE, LE, and two symmetric MEs. In particular, the following can never be true: In equilibrium, the (C, C)-type firm invests in product market A, but the (C, I)-type firm does not, and vice versa.31 Roughly speaking, this is because, given that the (C, C)-type firm finds it optimal to invest, the (C, I)-type firm has a profitable deviation by investing, that is, mimicking the (C, C)-type firm's strategy. Therefore, a competent type in product market A, whether it belongs to type (C, C) or (C, I), will either invest in the market together or not invest together. Thus, in each product market, there can only be the HE or the LE. Then, combining the two product markets, there are only four possibilities, all of which have been identified.
Given that the ME plays the HE in only one product market and the LE in the other, each type's profit in the ME is only a fraction of its profit under the HE for independent branding.32 Therefore, the HE is further shown to be the most profitable equilibrium whenever it exists.
Proposition 5. If the HE exists for a subgame in a branding regime br  {ind, umb}, that is, c < cbr, then it is the most profitable equilibrium of the subgame.33
The ME cannot make a branding regime optimal. If cind < c < cumb, then only the LE exists for independent branding, whereas the HE exists for umbrella branding, which makes it the optimal branding regime. Otherwise, if cumb < c < cind, then the ME exists for umbrella branding (as well as for independent branding). However, it is dominated by the HE for independent branding. In both cases, the optimal branding regime sustains the HE.
However, if the investment cost is sufficiently large, that is, c > max{cind, cumb}, then neither independent branding nor umbrella branding sustains the HE, and the ME does not exist. Therefore, only the LE exists for both branding regimes, so both types of firms are indifferent between the two branding regimes. Therefore, both branding regimes can be an equilibrium.
Otherwise, if c is sufficiently low so that the HE exists for both branding regimes, that is, c < min{cind, cumb}, then the expected profit of the firm is the same. This is because the HE is an efficient equilibrium and the consumer surplus is zero, which implies that the entire surplus goes to the firm. Therefore, at t -1 prior to drawing its capability type   {C, I}2, the firm is indifferent between the two branding regimes.34
The threshold costs cind and cumb are functions of key model parameters. Therefore, a comparison between these thresholds and c, which determines the optimal branding regime, boils down to a set of conditions on the model parameters. An equilibrium of the entire

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

159

game is characterized by the firm's optimal branding decision br  {ind, umb} and the equilibrium of the subgame, which can be either HE or LE.

Proposition 6. Equilibria of the game including the firm's

branding decision at t -1 are characterized as follows:

i. Suppose that  < . If  is sufficiently large, then

(umb, HE) is the unique equilibrium. Otherwise, if  is not

large, then the firm is indifferent between two equilibria:

(ind, LE) and (umb, LE).

ii.

Suppose

that



>

1 2

and

0

<

.

If



>

,

then

(ind,

HE) is the unique equilibrium if and only if  is sufficiently

large. If  is not large, then the firm is indifferent between

two equilibria: (ind, HE) and (umb, HE).

iii.

Suppose

that



>

1 2

and



<

0

< , and  >  and

 > . Then, (umb, HE) is the unique equilibrium if and

only if  is in an intermediate range. Otherwise, if  is

sufficiently small or sufficiently large, then the firm is indif-

ferent between two equilibria: (ind, LE) and (umb, LE).

Part i of the proposition states that if the demandside relatedness is low ( < ), then umbrella branding is optimal under sufficiently high supply-side relatedness. Given the limited overlap in the customer bases of the two product markets, an insufficient amount of information is available about the brand. Therefore, having an umbrella brand can effectively increase the amount of information available to consumers, as they can pool the information across product markets. This benefit from umbrella branding increases as the supply-side relatedness becomes higher. Therefore, if  is sufficiently large, then umbrella branding can sustain the HE, that is, cumb > c. Otherwise, if  is not large, then both independent branding and umbrella branding can sustain only the LE, and therefore, the firm is indifferent between the two branding

regimes. This part of the proposition is consistent with findings in the literature on umbrella branding. By using an adverse selection model with supply-side relatedness, Miklo´ s-Thal (2012) and Moorthy (2012) find that umbrella branding is more likely to hold signaling value if the supply-side relatedness is high.
However, part ii shows that sometimes the result may not hold; that is, independent branding can be optimal if both the demand-side ( > ) and supplyside relatedness are high. Under these circumstances, as discussed in Proposition 2, an umbrella brand induces excessive positive information spillover, which the firm is tempted to exploit. As a result, an umbrella brand is less capable of sustaining the HE, especially if  is large. The firm can avoid this temptation by adopting independent brands, and thus better sustain the HE. Therefore, if  is sufficiently large, then only independent branding can sustain the HE, which makes it the optimal branding choice. This part of the result highlights the role of independent branding as a disciplinary mechanism.
Given the distinct results in the first two parts, the results in the intermediate case of part iii are intuitive. If the demand-side relatedness is not too small or not too large, then cumb can be nonmonotonic in . Therefore, the HE may exist only for umbrella branding in an intermediate range of  and not for independent branding.
Figure 3 depicts the firm's optimal branding regime as a function of the supply-side relatedness (on the x­axis) and the demand-side relatedness (on the y­axis). The left panel describes part ii for a smaller 0( 0.23). Independent branding is optimal at the top right corner where both supply- and demand-side relatedness are high; otherwise, both branding regimes

Figure 3. The Firm's Optimal Branding Regime

160

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

can support the HE, in which case the firm is indifferent. The right panel describes parts i and iii. For a large 0( 0.875), if the demand-side relatedness  is small, umbrella branding is optimal if the supply-side relatedness  is sufficiently large. However, as  approaches 1, umbrella branding is optimal in an intermediate range of , and otherwise the firm is indifferent between the two branding regimes, as they can support only the LE.
5. CRM for an Umbrella Brand
This paper has thus far investigated a two-product firm's branding decision between independent branding and umbrella branding for a given level of twodimensional market relatedness. However, firms sometimes decide which markets to enter conditional on their predetermined branding choice. In particular, given a decision to use umbrella branding, an important CRM question arises: For distinct products under an umbrella brand, should the firm target the same customers or acquire a new and distinct set of customers?35 To address this question, the effect of the demandside relatedness on cumb is analyzed. For example, if  1, then all consumers who make any purchase will buy both products, so the firm will be targeting the same customers for different products. However, if  0, then each customer makes a purchase in only one product market, thereby representing the case in which the firm targets distinct sets of customers in different product markets.
There are two opposing forces emerging from demandside relatedness that affect the firm's investment incentives. On the one hand, for a higher , there is more information to be pooled across product markets, so the firm will find it more tempting to invest in only one of the product markets. Therefore, cumb can decrease in . On the other hand, there are more consumers who make purchases in both product markets. Therefore, if they observe any bad outcome in the firm's track record, then they may punish the firm in both product markets by paying lower prices. This fear can discipline the firm's behavior and amplify the incentives for investments. If the supply-side relatedness is high, the former dominates, and cumb is maximized at  0.
Proposition 7. If the supply-side relatedness is sufficiently high, then the scope of the HE decreases in demand-side relatedness, so the maximum of cumb is attained at  0.
Thus, if an umbrella brand's products share similar production technologies, then the firm will want to target customers with different preferences and prevent excessive information pooling across product markets. This result provides an important implication for CRM: the firm needs to consider trade-offs between providing

more information to consumers and granting them greater purchasing power to punish the firm.
6. Conclusions
This paper explores how a firm should manage its brand when entering new product markets. Should it leverage its existing brand or create a new brand? This classic question in marketing has received substantial attention from academics and practitioners alike since the 1980s. Although some may believe that the topic has become less relevant over time, it is now just as relevant as before. Some classic example firms that had insisted on a house of brands strategy, such as P&G and Coca-Cola, have made efforts to shift toward a branded house strategy.36 Facebook initially adopted a house of brands strategy for the acquired firms like Instagram and WhatsApp by keeping them as independent brands. However, more recently, Facebook is considering including the Facebook name on the acquired platforms and redesign its brand architecture.37
This paper contributes to the literature on branding by providing an analytical framework of market relatedness and offering managerial implications for how a multiproduct firm should make the branding decision based on how related the product markets are. This paper finds that if demand-side relatedness is low, then umbrella branding (a branded house) becomes increasingly more attractive as supply-side relatedness increases. This result seems consistent with example companies, such as Honda and Canon. However, if the product markets are closely related on both the supply and demand sides, then the firm may prefer independent branding (a house of brands). The reason is that an umbrella brand can induce too much positive information spillover that the firm is tempted to exploit, instead of investing in quality in both product markets. Therefore, independent branding can be a disciplinary mechanism that eliminates information spillover, thus allowing the firm to commit to investing in both product markets.
This result provides new insight into why highquality firms, such as P&G, may want to avoid using their existing brand to enter a new product market.38 The firm's well-known house of brands strategy may have acted as a disciplinary mechanism and contributed to the continued success of all of the company's brands.
This new insight was made possible because this paper analyzes a model of reputation with the features of both adverse selection and moral hazard. The model of adverse selection, which has been extensively studied in the extant literature, seems to indicate that closer market relatedness should expand the scope of the signaling role of umbrella branding. In the model of moral hazard without adverse

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

161

selection, consumers will not make rational inferences across product markets about unobserved firm types. Instead, information spillover will be captured through some arbitrary beliefs imposed by the researcher, which is neither appealing nor realistic.
This paper treats the firm-generated track record as a medium of information transfer between the firm and consumers. However, this study can be applied to more general modes of information transmission, such as advertising (e.g., Mayzlin and Shin 2011), word of mouth (e.g., Mayzlin 2006), and consumer search (e.g., Wolinsky 1986). Two main features are common to all of these settings: first, firms have some control over the information conveyed to consumers, whether it is through investment in quality or advertising, and second, umbrella branding will invite consumers to pool information across different product markets. Thus, the reputation spillover in this paper can be interpreted in other settings as the spillover in advertising or word of mouth, both of which are sometimes integral parts of a firm's branding strategy.39
In this paper, consumers gain utility from the quality of a product, and therefore, which branding regime can better convey information about quality is an important issue. However, consumers may sometimes be more invested in finding a product that will match their horizontal preferences. In such a setting, a firm may use branding as a tool to communicate information about its horizontal positioning and provide value to consumers by mitigating their uncertainty about their preference matching (e.g., Sappington and Wernerfelt 1985). This important issue of brand positioning remains to be further explored in future research.

Appendix. Proofs Proof for Section 3
Proof of Lemma 1. Part 2 of the lemma directly follows from (4). Parts 1 and 3 require a proof. The posterior beliefs for all nine possible track records of the firm in the HE are as follows:

A(L, H; umb)

Pr(C,

C)

·

(1

Pr(C,C) · (1 - ) + Pr(C,I) - ) + Pr(C, I) · 0 + Pr(I, C)

·0 ·

+

Pr(I,

I)

·

0

,

A(L, Ø; umb)

Pr(C,

C)

Pr(C, C) · (1 - ) + Pr(C,I) · (1 - ) · (1 - ) + Pr(C, I) · (1 - ) + Pr(I,C)

+

Pr(I,

I)

,

A(L, L; umb)

Pr(C,

C)

·

Pr(C,C) · (1 - )2+ (1 - )2+(Pr(C,I)+

Pr(C,I) · Pr(I, C))

(1 - ) · (1 - )

+

Pr(I,

I)

,

A(Ø, H; umb)

Pr(C,

C)

·



Pr(C,C) ·  + Pr(C,I) · 0 + Pr(C, I) · 0 + Pr(I, C) · 

+

Pr(I,

I)

·

0

,

A(Ø, L; umb)

Pr(C,

C)

·

(1

Pr(C, C) · (1 - ) + Pr(C,I) - ) + Pr(C,I) + Pr(I,C) · (1 -

)

+

Pr(I,

I)

,

A(H, H; umb)

Pr(C,C) · 2 + Pr(C,I) ·  · 0 Pr(C, C) · 2 + Pr(C, I) ·  · 0 + Pr(I,C) ·  · 0 + Pr(I,I) · 0 · 0

1,

A(H, Ø; umb)

Pr(C, C) ·  + Pr(C,I) ·  Pr(C, C) ·  + Pr(C, I) ·  + Pr(I,C) · 0 + Pr(I,I) · 0

1,

A(H, L; umb)

Pr(C, C) · (1 - ) + Pr(C,I) ·  Pr(C,C) · (1 - ) + Pr(C,I) ·  + Pr(I, C) · 0 · +Pr(I, I) · 0

1,

Acknowledgments The author thanks Jiwoong Shin for his exceptional support, without which this work would not have been possible. The author is also grateful to Aniko O¨ ry and K. Sudhir for their helpful feedback. This research also benefited from conversations with Dongkyu Chang, Bing Jing, Vineet Kumar, Jeanine Miklo´ s-Thal, Zvika Neeman, Subrata Sen, and Kosuke Uetake. The author would also like to thank the senior editor, the associate editor, and two anonymous reviewers, who helped to improve this research significantly. The author also thanks the seminar participants at Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business, City University of Hong Kong, Korea University, Peking University HSBC Business School, Simon Business School at the University of Rochester, Yale School of Management, 2018 Bass FORMS Conference, and 2018 INFORMS Marketing Science Conference. All remaining errors are the author's.

and finally, A(Ø, Ø; umb) 0. The posterior beliefs for independent branding are defined
in (4). These beliefs can be obtained by plugging  0 into the distribution Pr() and computing the beliefs for umbrella branding.

Part 1. The direct effect is straightforward for both independent branding and umbrella branding; hB Ø because
there is no information spillover, and the case is identical to the independent branding. Moreover, A(H, hB; umb) 1  A(Ø, hB; umb) is obvious. Thus, proofs are required for the case of umbrella branding and hB  {L, H}; that is, A(Ø, H; umb)  A(L, H; umb) and A(Ø, L; umb)  A(L, L; umb)
need to be shown.

First, if hB H, then A(Ø, H; umb) - A(L, H; umb)

(1-0 )(1-)(+(1-)0 ) 1-(+(1-)0 )



0.

162

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

Second, if hB L, then the difference A(Ø, L; umb)- A(L, L; umb) is positive because in the combined fraction,
the denominator is by definition positive, and the numerator is (Pr(C,C)(1-)+Pr(C,I))×(Pr(C,C)(1-)2 +Pr(C,I)(1- )+Pr(I,C)(1-)+Pr(I,I))-(Pr(C,C)(1-)2 +Pr(C,I)(1-))×
(Pr(C,C)(1-)+Pr(C,I)+Pr(I,C)(1-)+Pr(I,I)) (Pr(C,C)× Pr(I,C)(1 - )2 + Pr(C,I)Pr(I,C)(1-) + Pr(C,C)Pr(I,I)(1 -) +
Pr(C,I)Pr(I,I)) 0.

Part 3. For hA H, A(H, hB) 1 for all hB  *, so the con-

dition trivially holds.

For hA Ø, A(Ø,H;umb) 0 +(1-0), A(Ø, Ø; umb)

0, and A(Ø, L; umb)

Pr(C,C)·(1-)+Pr(C,I) 0 ·(1-)+1-0

0

-

0 (1-0 )·· 0 ·(1-)+1-0

.

Clearly, A(Ø,H;umb)  A(Ø,Ø; umb). Additionally, A(Ø,

Ø; umb)  A(Ø, L; umb). It is straightforward that A(Ø, H;

umb), A(Ø, Ø; umb), andA(Ø, L; umb) are increasing in, in-

dependent of, and decreasing in , respectively.

Finally, for hA A(L, Ø; umb)

L, A(L, H; umb)

(0

(0 +(1-0 ))(1-) +(1-0 ))(1-)+(1-0

)(1-),

0

0 (1-) (1-)+1-0

,

and

A(L, L; umb)

0

(0

0 (1-)[(0 +(1-0 ))(1-)+(1-0 )(1-)] +(1-0 ))·(1-)2 +20 (1-0 )(1-)(1-)+(1-0 )(1-0

+0

).

Therefore,

A(L,H;umb) A(L,Ø;umb)

if

and

only

if

0 +(1-0 ) (0+(1-0))(1-) + (1-0)(1-)



0

0 (1-)+1-0

.

This

can

be

simplified

to 0 + (1 - 0)  0(1 - ), which always holds. We have A(L, Ø; umb)  A(L, L; umb) if and only if

0 0 (1-)+1-0



0 (1-)[(0 +(1-0 ))·(1-)+(1-0 )(1-)] 0 (0 +(1-0 ))·(1-)2 +20 (1-0 )(1-)(1-)+(1-0 )(1-0 +0 )

holds. This can be simplified to 0(1 - 0)(1 - )  0,

which always holds. Therefore, A(L, H; umb)  A(L, Ø;

umb)  A(L, L; umb) .

Taking the first derivative of each posterior belief with respect to , it is straightforward that A(L, H; umb), A(L, Ø; umb), andA(L, L; umb) are increasing in, independent of,
and decreasing in , respectively. 

Proofs for Section 4

Proof of Proposition 1. The threshold level for a deviation

in one product market is computed first, and then the

threshold for a deviation in both product markets is identi-

fied. For the former case, without loss of generality, assume

that the firm is competent in product market A, without

assuming its type in market B, that is,  (C, B). For the

latter case, the firm has to be competent in both product

markets,  ·[2 (x·

that is,  · VC,B (H,H

;

(C, C). Then, ciCn,dB defined in (6) ind) + (1-x)·VC,B (H,L;ind) -

is ciCn,dB x · VC,B

(L, H; ind)

-

(1 -x)·VC,B (L, L; ind))

+

1- 2

(VC,B

(H

,

Ø;

ind)

-

VC,B (L,Ø;ind))] ·[2 (x(VC,B (H,H;ind)- VC,B (L, H;ind)) +

(1

-

x)(VC,B

(H,

L;

ind)

-

VC,B

(L,

L;

ind)))

+

1- 2

(VC,B

(H

,

Ø;ind)-

VC,B (L,Ø;ind))], where x  if B C and x 0 if B I.

This cutoff level is a weighted sum over the difference in payoff

functions of the form VC,B (H, hBt ; br)- VC,B (L, hBt ; br), where hBt  *. Then, it follows that this difference equals the difference in prices, that is,

VC,B

( H,
(

hBt

;

) ind

( -)VC,B( L,

hBt

;

) ind
)

pA H, hBt ; ind + pB H, hBt ; ind

-

pA(L,

hBt

;

2) ind

+

pB(L,

hBt ;

) ind

.

2

(A.1)

This is because in (5), the payoff function is the sum of the

expected per-period profit and the continuation payoff, the

latter of which is independent of the endowed track record of the firm. Therefore, in VC,B (H, hBt ; ind) - VC,B (L, hBt ; ind), the continuation payoff cancels out, and only the difference in

per-period profit survives.

Therefore,



ciCn,dB

 2

·


hBt *

wB

(hBt

)

·

pA(H,hBt;ind)2-pA(L,hBt ;ind)

Premium in market A

+ pB(H,hBt;ind)2-pB(L,hBt;ind),

Premium in market B 0

(A.2)

where the weights are as follows: wB (H) x, wB (L)

(1 - x), weights vanishes

fiaosnrdanhwyBt *hBBt(wØ)B*(hbBt1)e-cau1.s. eTTohhfeeLreepfmorremem,aitu1h.meThsieunmfirmmoa'frskttehrtaecsBke

record improves in market A, from which the consumer cannot

make inferences about the realized quality in market B under

independent branding. Additionally, because of the lemma,

pA(H, hBt ; ind) and pA(L, hBt ; ind) do not depend on hBt . Therefore,

cind simplifies to cind

 2

·

pA(H,hBt ;ind)-pA(L,hBt ;ind) 2

2 4

·

0

1-0 (1-)+1-0

.

Because cinBd does not depend on B, the notation for the type is dropped and simply written as cind. The cutoff level is

independent of the firm's capability type in market B because

under independent branding, the firm's performance in the

two markets is observed independently. 

Proof of Proposition 2. The threshold cost level for the

umbrella brand's HE is characterized as in the case of in-

dependent branding. Two key distinctions are as follows: (1)

information spillovers are induced through consumers' be-

liefs, and (2) the (C, C) type may deviate in both product

markets. Therefore, the overall threshold cost level for an um-

brella brand's HE is the minimum of three levels: a single de-

viation by (C, I) and (C, C) and a double deviation by (C, C). The

threshold cost level from the double deviation is denoted by c~uCm,Cb. The analysis of the firm's deviation in a single product market

is exactly the case defined

same as the analysis in (A.2). We have

in the cuCm,bB

inde2pe·ndheBtnt*bwranBd(hinBt )g·

(pA

(H,hBt

;umb)-pA 2

(L,hBt

;umb)

+

pB

(H,hBt

;umb)-pB 2

(L,hBt

;umb)),

where

the

pre-

mium in market B, pB(H, hBt ; umb) - pB(L, hBt ; umb), does not

vanish. The term wB (hBt ) is the probability with which outcome hBt

is produced in market B, given that the firm is of type B. If B C,

then wC(H) , wC(L) (1 - ), and wC(Ø) 1 - . How-

ever, if B I, then wI(H) 0, wI(L) , and wI(Ø) 1 - .

Therefore, which of cuCm,Cb and cuCm,Ib is smaller is determined by which of the two distributions wC(·) and wI(·) places a

greater weight the difference

boentwa esemnaltlweroptrhicreesphroelmdsiuims sc.uCmM,Cb o-recuCpm,Irbecis2ely,

(wC(hBt )

-

wI

(hBt

))(pA

(H,hBt

;umb)-pA 2

(L,hBt

;umb)

+

pB

(H,hBt

;umb)-pB 2

(L,hBt

;umb)),

which

is

equal

to

2  2

·

(pA(H,

H;

umb)

-

pA(H,

L;

umb)-

(pA(L,

H; umb) - pA(L, L; umb))). Therefore, cuCm,Cb  cuCm,Ib if and only if

pA(H, H; umb) - pA(H, L; umb)  pA(L, H; umb) - pA(L, L; umb).

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

163

The left-hand side vanishes because pA(H, H; umb)

pA(H, L; umb) , and the right-hand side is positive.

Thus, cuCm,Cb  cuCm,I b. The cutoff level regarding the (C, C) type's deviation in

both product markets, c~uCm,Cb, remains to be characterized. Under this deviation, the firm is able to save the total in-

vestment cost 2c and, in return, produce a bad outcome in both

product markets, that is, ht (L, L) with probability 1. For the HE to exist, the equilibrium payoff (similarly defined for in-

dependent branding in (5)) must be greater than the payoff

from this particular deviation, VC,C(ht-1; umb, dA dB 0)

pA (ht-1 ;umb)+pB (ht-1 ;umb) 2

+



·



Pr(ht|,

dA

dB

0) · VC,C(ht; umb),

where Pr(L, Ø|, dA dB 0) Pr(Ø, L|, dA dB and Pr(L, L|, dA dB 0) 2, and zero otherwise.

0)

1- 2

This deviation is not profitable if and only if c  c~uCm,Cb

 2

·

[2 ((2

-

02)VC,C(H, H; umb)

+

((1

-

)

-

0(1 -

0))(VC,C(L, H;

umb) + VC,C(H, L; ; umb)) + ((1 - )2 - (1 - 0)2)VC,C(L, L; umb)) +

1- 2

((

-

0)(VC,C(H, Ø;

umb)

+

VC,C(Ø, H; umb))

+

(1

-



-

(1

-

p(0p)rA)e(Hs(s,VhiBtoC;un,Cm(bL)2-r,peØAs(u;Lu,lhtmBts;ubm)bi+)n+VpCc~B,(uCCHm,(C,ØbhBt ;,uLm;2bu)2-m·pBb(L)h,)Bth)Bt]*;u. mwRb)Ce),o,Cwr(ghhaBt en;rdiezAitnhge

the exdB 0)·
weights

wbCr,C(hBt ; dA dB 0) for each hBt  * are defined as follows:

wbCr,C(H; dA dB 0) 2, wbCr,C(L; dA dB 0)

(22-), and

wisbCr,Ch(BtØ*; dwAbCr,C Repeating

dB (hBt ; the

0) 1 - ; thus, the sum of these weights dA dB 0) 1. exercise of comparing cuCm,Cb and cuCm,Ib above,

it is straightforward to show that cuCm,Cb  c~uCm,Cb. Therefore,

cumb cuCm,Cb. 

Proof of Proposition 3. By using the properties in Lemma 1,

pA(H, hB; umb) pB(hA, H; umb) because the posterior beliefs

are 1 in these cases. By plugging the prices into cumb cuCm,Cb, we

have cumb

 2

·[2· (pA(H, H; umb) - pA(L, H; umb) + pB(H, H;

umb)

-

pB

(L,

H;

umb))

+

·(1-) 2

(pA

(H,

L;

umb)

-

pA

(L,

L;

umb)

+

pB(H,

L;

umb)

-

pB

(L,

L;

umb))

+

1- 2

(pA(H,

Ø;

umb)

-

pA(L,

Ø;

umb) + pB(H, Ø; umb) - pB(L, Ø; umb))]. Further plugging in

pA(H, hB; umb) , pA(H, h) - pA(H, h~) 0, and pB(h, H) - pB(h~, H) 0 for any h, h~  {H, L, Ø} results in

cumb

 2

·

2

 

+

(1

-

2) 

pA(L,H;umb)
increasing in 

-2(1

-

)

· pA(L,L;umb)

+

1

- 2



decreasing in   - pA (L, Ø;

umb)+

pB(H,Ø;uinmcrbea)s-inpgBin(L,Ø;umb).

In this equation, the only term that can be decreasing in  is (1 - 2)pA(L, H; umb) if and only if  > 1/2. Therefore, if
  12, then each term is increasing in , so the maximum of cumb is attained at  1. Additionally, irrespective of the value
of , if  is sufficiently small (close to 0), then the last line of

the equation above dominates, which increases in . Thus,

cumb is again maximized at  1.

Now, suppose that  > 12. Then, the second derivative of cumb with respect to  is

4 

·

2cumb 2

2(1-0)22(1-)
>0

(1-01--(12-0))3

<0 because >1/2

- (1-2020(22-(1-0)-(1(1--00))))3.
>0

The first the second

term term

in is

the brackets is negative because 

always

positive.

Therefore,

2 cumb 2

> <

12, 0.

and

Because the second derivative is negative, there are three

possible cases in which the value of  maximizes the cutoff

level

cumb. First,

if

cumb 

|

0

< 0,

then

cumb

is decreasing

in  in

the entire space of , so the maximum of cumb is attained at

aevnedr0y.cwumShbe|ecroe1n,<dso,1i,itfsthmecunamxb, |iamcc1uo>mrd0iis,nagtthteonthc1eu.mFmbineiaasnlliynv,cairlfueaecusmtibhn|ego0rine>m0, the maximum of cumb is attained at an intermediate ^  (0, 1).

These

conditions

for

cumb 

for



The

second

derivative

is

2 

·

0
cumb 

and  (1 -

20 (1-)2 (1-0 ) (1-0 (2-0 -(1-0 )))2

)

+

1- 2

1 1-0

).

1 remain to be checked. 0)(2 ((1-(10--)((11--20)) )2 +

Case 1. First, if  0, then the expression above is equal

to

(1

-

0)(2

((1(-1-)(10 -)22)

+

20 (1-)2 (1-0 )3

)

+

1- 2

1 1-0

).

This

is

linear

in

.

Thus,

| cumb
 

0

<0

if

and

only

if

0

<

:

2-1 

and



is

sufficiently large, that is,  >  : Case 2. Second, cumb attains

(1-0

(1-0 )2 )(2(1-)+1-0

).

its maximum at 

1

if

| cumb
 

1 > 0, where 2·cumb|

1

(1-0 )(2(-21--1+2(1(1--20)2+0(10-2 )02))

+

1- 1 2 1-0

).

This

is

again

linear

in

,

and

it

is

positive

if and only if either 0   :

1-2-2+3-(1-)2 2-1+2 2 (2-6+32 )2

or 0 <  and  is sufficiently small, that is,  < 

. (1-)(1-20 +0 2 )2
(1-0 +20 )(1-20 +0 2 )2 -20 (1-)3 (1-0 )2

Note that  >  and  > .

Case 3. Finally, the maximum of cumb is attained at an in-

termediate

value

of



 (0, 1)

if

| cumb
 

0

>0

and

| cumb
 

1

<0

simultaneously hold. Based on the necessary and sufficient

conditions identified in the previous two cases, the following

conditions must be satisfied: (1) 0 >  or  <  and (2) 0 <  and  > . These conditions can be summarized as follows:

 < 0 <  and  > , or 0 <  and  <  < .

Combining all the identified conditions proves the proposition. 

Proof of Proposition 4. It must be shown that there are no other equilibria of the model in addition to the HE, LE, and ME. The proposition is proven in two steps. First, it is shown that the firm's optimal investment decision in any equilibrium does not depend on its track record; therefore, in equilibrium, the firm should either always invest or never

164

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

invest in any given product market. It is still possible that the firm always invests in one product market and never invests in the other product market, as in the ME. Second, each equilibrium that satisfies this condition is considered (in addition to the HE, LE, and ME), and its existence is ruled out. The proof of the second step is relegated to the online appendix.

Claim A.1. In equilibrium, the firm either always invests or never invests in any given product market.

Proof. For any given track record of the firm, ht-1, the payoff
from investing in quality in product market A is denoted by V(ht-1; br, dAt 1), where dAt 1 represents the firm's decision to incur an investment cost. This payoff function is

V(ht-1; br, dAt 1)

+



·

( 2

(

Pr(hBt

× +

V

(H,

L; (

(1 - ) 1

br) + (1 - Pr(hBt

pA (ht-1

;

br)

+ 2

pB(ht-1

;

br)

-

c

-

c

·

dBt

) H V(H,

H;

br)

+

( 1

-

Pr(hBt

)) H

- ))P)r(hBt

) H V(L, H; br)

)

H V(L, L; br) + V(Ø, Ø; br)

+ +

1- Pr2(hBt

(V(H, Ø; )
H V)(Ø,

br) H;

+ (1 - )V(L, Ø;

br)

+

( 1

-

Pr(hBt

br) ))
H

× V(Ø, L; br)) ,

where Pr(hBt H) is the probability with which the outcome hBt H is produced, given that the firm is of type B in market B. Thus, Pr(hBt H)  if B C and dB 1 and zero otherwise.
On the other hand, if the firm decides not to invest in quality, denoted by dA 0, then the payoff function is

V(h-×+t-cVP1;·rbd((rhBH,Bt+d,AHH·; (b0)r2V))(+0(p0·LPA·,r(H(1(hh;t-bBt-r1P);rb+H(rh2)()Bt1+-pBPH(rh)()htV-Bt1)(HH,)L); br)

.

×++(V(11--(LP,rL)(Vh; bBtr()L+,HØV);)bV(rØ)(+,ØØP,;rLb(;rhb)Btr))+))1H-2)V((ØV,H(;Hbr, Ø) ; br)

Then, in an arbitrary equilibrium, it is optimal for the firm

1wto)h>ienrvVees(tchint-: 1p; rbor,dd·uA[c2t(Pm0ra)(,hrkBtweht iAHch)i(fVhaon(lddHs,oHnifl;ybarni)fd-VoV(nhl(ytL-,1iH;fb;rcb,<rd)A)c+,

(1 - Pr(hBt br) - V(L,

H))(V Ø; br))].

(H, L; Note

bthr)at-cVis(Li,nLd;ebpr)e)n) d+ent1-2of(Vthe(Htr,aØck;

record of the firm, implying that this condition either holds

for all track records or no track records. In other words, for

each type of firm   {C, I}2, the firm either always invests or

never invests. 

Claim A.2. In addition to the HE, LE, and ME, no other equilibria can exist.
Proof. The proof is relegated to the online appendix. 

Corollary A.1. An independent brand's HE is more profitable than both brandings' ME.

Proof. Given the definition of the ME, the firm types ex-

pected profit in the equilibrium are CM,CE(br) CM,I E(br)

CH,CE (ind) 2

and

I,MC E(br)

I,MI E(br)

0. 

Proof of Proposition 5. The firm's expected profit is positive

if and only if the expected per-period profit defined in (8) is

positive. In the HE, the firm makes an investment whenever it

is competent in a product market, that is, i(h) 1 if i C. Given the investment strategy, the distribution over realized

quality depends on the firm type. First, for  (C, C),

Pr(H, H|)

 2

·

2,

Pr(H, L|)

Pr(L, H|)

 2

·

(1

-

),

Pr(L, L|)

 2

·

(1

- )2,

Pr(H, Ø|)

Pr(Ø, H|)

1- 2

·

,

Pr(L,

Ø|)

Pr(Ø, L|)

1- 2

·

(1

-

),

and,

finally,

Pr(Ø,

Ø|)

1-2.

Then, using the previous results on prices, under inde-

pendent branding, the (C, C)-type firm expects the profit

C,C(br)

-2c +  (2pA(H, H; br) + (1 - )

×

(pA(H2 ,

L;

br)

+

pB

(H,

L;

) br) +(1

-

)2

pA(L,

L;

) br)

+

1

-



((pA(H,

Ø;

br)

+

pB(H,

Ø;

) br)

+(1

2 -

)(pA

(L,

Ø;

br)

+

pB(L,

Ø;

)) br)

+  pA(Ø, Ø; br). 2

(A.4)

The expected profit in each period for (C, I)-type and (I, C)-type firms is

C,I (br)

-

c

+



(

(pA(H,

L;

br)

+

pB(H,

L;

) br)

22

)

+(1 - )pA(L, L; br)

++21--2((p2A((Lp,AØ(H; b, rØ) ;+brp)B+(Lp, BØ(H; b,rØ));)br)) 2
+  pA(Ø, Ø; br). 2

(A.5)

Finally, the profit of the (I, I)-type firm is

I,I (br)

 2

pA

(L,

L;

br)

+

1

- 2



(pA

(L,

Ø;

br)

+

pB(L,

Ø;

) br)

+  pA(Ø, Ø; br). 2

(A.6)

For independent branding (br ind), C,C  0 if and

only

if

-2c

+

 2

(

·

pA

(H,

hB;

ind)

+

(1

-

)

·

pA(L,

hB

;

ind))

+

1- 2

( · pA(H, hB; ind) + (1 - )pA(L, hB; ind)

+

pA

(Ø,

hB;

ind))

+

 2

·

pA(Ø, hB; ind)  0.

For

the

(C, I)-type

firm,

C,I



0

if

and

only

if

-c

+

 2

1 2

+

1 2

pA(Ø,

hB;

ind)

+

(2

2- 2

+

1- 2

2-2)pA(L,

hB;

ind)



0.

Also,

I,I



0 because it never incurs investment costs.

Therefore, an independent brand of any type makes a

nonnegative profit in the HE if and only if c  c^ind : min{14( ·

p(H,

hB

;

ind)

+

(1

-

)

·

p(L,

hB

;

ind)

+

p(Ø,

hB

;

ind)),

1 4

(

·

pA

(H,

hB;

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

165

ind)+ (2-)·pA(L,hB;ind) +2pA(Ø,hB;ind))}, so c^ind

 4

(

+

0 (1-)2 1-0 

+

0).

This

cutoff

level

is

greater

than

cind .

Therefore,

if

the HE exists, that is, c < cind, then c < c^ind must also hold, that

is, the expected profit of all types must be positive.

For umbrella branding (br umb), repeating similar com-

putations, it is straightforward to show that the condition
C,C(umb)  0 holds whenever c < cumb. Similarly, C,I(umb)  0 holds whenever c < cumb. Therefore, if the HE exists for

umbrella branding, the firm is expected to earn a positive

profit, regardless of its type.

This completes a proof that for each branding regime the HE is the most profitable equilibrium whenever it exists. 

Proof of Proposition 6. The threshold levels in the two branding regimes, cind and cumb, are compared. Recall from (7) that

for independent branding, branding, from (A.4), cumb

cind
 4

 4
·[ -

· 1(-1-00), and for · ((2 - 1)pA(L,

umbrella H;umb) +

2(1 - )pA(L,L;umb)) - (1 - )· (pA(L,Ø;umb)- pB(H,Ø;umb) +

pB (L,Ø;umb))].

Case 1 ( > 12, 0 < , and  > ). The term cumb monotonically decreases in . Because cumb evaluated at  0 co-

incides with cind, cind  cumb.

Case

2

(

<

12,

or

(

>

1 2

and

0

>

),

or

(

>

1 2

and



<

).

The term cumb monotonically increases in . Thus, cumb  cind.

Case

3

(

>

1 2

and

(

>



and



<

0

<

),

or

(

<



<



and

0 < ). The term cumb is nonmonotonic and concave in . If

cumb evaluated at  1 is greater than cind, then cumb  cind.

Otherwise, if cumb evaluated at  1 is less than cind, then

cind  cumb if and only if  is sufficiently large. At  1,

cumb| if and

1

·(1-0 ) 2

·

(1(-1-200+)(10-22-0(+1-002)) ),

only if 0 < ^ :

2-1 2

and



>

^

:

which is less than cind

1-20 +0 2 2(1-0 )

.

Note

that

^  (, ) and ^  (, ). Therefore, cind| 1 > cumb| 1 if either

  (^ , 1) and 0  (, ^ ), or   (^ , ) and 0  (0, ). In this case, cind > cumb if and only if  > ^ for some ^  (0, 1). 

Proof of Proposition 7. If  1, then pA(H, hB; umb)

pB(H, h; umb)  for any hB  *. By plugging this into cumb

in

(A.3)

and

differentiating

with

respect

to

,

| dcumb
d 

1

-

3 2

·

(1-0 )2 (0 (1-)2 +(1-0 ))(0 (1-) +1-0 )



0.



Endnotes
1 In practice, some firms have adopted a hybrid brand architecture between these two extreme strategies. This paper focuses on the trade-offs between the two extreme strategies. The findings provide insights into why some firms use an intermediate approach in the whole spectrum of brand architectures. 2 For these reasons, most previous research on umbrella branding has assumed that consumers are aware of the association between a firm's different products only when the firm uses the same brand. This paper makes the same assumption, which is discussed in Section 3.3. 3 For more information on the Volkswagen scandal, see http:// www.bbc.com/news/business-34324772 (last accessed August 12, 2020). 4 When exploiting this positive spillover, the firm is afraid of the negative spillover that the firm's lack of investment will generate.
This fear can discipline the firm's behavior. Therefore, a complete
intuition depends on which of the two spillovers is stronger, which is

determined by consumers' prior beliefs about the firm's competence type. For more details, see Section 4.2. 5 This view is based on the seminal works of Milgrom and Roberts (1982) and Kreps and Wilson (1982). 6 The assumption about the cost disadvantage of umbrella branding is contrary to an oft-cited anecdotal evidence (e.g., Tauber 1981). 7 This mechanism was first laid out in the seminal works by Klein and Leffler (1981) and Shapiro (1983). 8 For example, Cabral (2009) considers two assumptions: one in which a failure of one product induces consumers' pessimistic beliefs about the quality of both products and another in which failures of both products are required to induce such beliefs. Depending on the imposed beliefs, different equilibria can be sustained. 9 Choi (1998) is an exception in that he analyzes a model of both adverse selection and moral hazard in a setting in which an opportunity to launch a new product arrives randomly over an infinite time horizon. However, the underlying mechanism corresponds to one for moral hazard models. The difference in his work is that the firm posts future opportunities to introduce new products (as opposed to future profits of existing products) as a bond. 10 The demand-side relatedness in this paper affects the amount of information consumers observe, so greater demand-side relatedness can be interpreted as a longer consumer memory. Consistent with findings in research with finite consumer memory, this paper finds that a longer consumer memory (or higher demand-side relatedness) can reduce the scope of the efficient equilibrium. 11 An earlier version of the paper relaxes this assumption, and an incompetent type can also produce a high-quality product with a positive probability less than . The main results of the current version are robust. 12 This is a simple way to capture the firm's reputation concerns by connecting its track record to future payoffs. This assumption can be relaxed so that a consumer observes a longer track record of a firm. However, this will add analytical complexity and provide little additional insight. Importantly, this assumption helps reduce the state space and hence the number of equilibria. 13 A rational consumer might be aware of the possibility that even distinct brands could belong to the same firm and engage in a costly search to establish the association on their own. Taken literally, this assumption implies that this cost is prohibitively high. The results in this paper will be robust if there is a small fraction of consumers who are able to establish the link between the same firm's products with different brand names. 14 This is a common assumption in the branding literature, which can be motivated by having two consumers with the same unit demand arrive in each period and by the firm having the capacity to serve only one consumer in each market. Given this assumption, this paper abstracts away from pricing issues, especially price signaling, and instead focuses on the reputation established by the firm's performance record as the main channel through which information about quality is communicated. 15 This particular sequence is mathematically equivalent (after scaling the investment cost by a constant) to an alternative sequence in which the consumer arrives first and then the firm makes investment decisions. In the former, an investment in quality can be wasted because a consumer may not have a unit demand. This situation would not occur in the latter. 16 The analysis focuses on pure strategies, but Endnote 33 discusses mixed strategies. 17 The posterior beliefs are discussed in Section 3.3. 18 Therefore, the case in which a consumer has no unit demand and the case in which she has a unit demand and pays a price of zero are not the same. The effective price she pays in both cases is zero.

166

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

However, in the former, no outcome is generated, whereas in the

latter, either H or L will be the outcome.

19 This is more formally stated in Proposition 5.

20 Thus, conceptually, independent branding is a special case of

umbrella branding with  0, which implies that consumers do not

make any inferences across product markets.

21

The

total

expected

demand

is

2

·

 2

+

2

·

1- 2

+

0

·

 2

1.

22 Posterior beliefs under general investment strategies can be com-

puted similarly using Bayes' rule.

23 In an alternative equilibrium, this need not always be true. For

instance, if the (C, C)-type firm invests in product market A and the (C, I)-type firm does not, then i(ht-1; br) is not sufficient. Rather, consumers' posterior distribution over the type space in two product markets {C, I}2 must be considered. However, Proposition 4 shows

that such strategies cannot be part of an equilibrium. Thus, for all

equilibria of the model, dealing with the posterior belief in each product market i(ht-1; br) is indeed sufficient.

24 By symmetry, the consumer's posterior beliefs about B, B(hA, hB; br),

are updated similarly and have the same properties.

25 This distribution of new outcomes also depends on demand-side

relatedness. For instance, Pr(H, L|C, C)

 2

(1

-

)

because

the

con-

sumer experiences the realized quality in both markets with proba-

bility 2, and the (C, C)-type firm will produce an outcome (H, L) with probability (1 - ).

26 If incompetent firms can also produce a high-quality good with a positive probability (less than ), then cind will vanish at 0 0 and 0 1.

27 It is still true that a track record of high-quality products reveals the

firm's competence. However, given a smaller , such a situation is

less likely to occur. Moreover, a track record of low-quality products

is less informative about the firm's incompetence.

28 By assuming that the firm chooses its branding decision before

realizing its type, this game precludes potential signaling through the

firm's branding choice.

29 This assumption requires a further justification because if con-

sumers know that a firm is deciding whether to use the same or

different brands in distinct product markets, then consumers should

be aware of the association between the two products regardless of

the firm's branding decision. To address this issue, Cabral (2000)

assumes that there is a continuum of firms with a basic product in which

only firms of measure zero are endowed with another product and

make the branding decision. Then, if consumers face different brands in

different product markets, then each product belongs to a distinct firm

with probability one, and therefore, consumers treat them as unrelated.

30 Other equilibria in which the firm's investment decision is different

for different track records can exist if the consumer can observe a

longer history of the firm. However, the result that the HE is the most

profitable if c > 0 is robust. Neeman et al. (2019) explore this issue.

31 The same is true about product market B; that is, it can never be true

that the (C, C)-type firm invests in market B but the (I, C)-type firm

does not, and vice versa.

32 This result is stated as Corollary A.1 in the appendix.

33 Although this paper analyzes pure-strategy equilibria, intuitively,

the results in Proposition 5 should be robust to mixed strategies given

this paper's focus on the most profitable equilibrium. Suppose there

is a mixed-strategy equilibrium in which a firm of type  invests in a

product market with a positive probability. An indifference condition

implies that the investment cost c equals the marginal benefit of an

investment through the continuation payoff given the mixed strategy.

This benefit is only a fraction of the threshold under an alternative

equilibrium in which the firm adopts a pure strategy to always invest,

for two reasons: one, the firm is less likely to produce a high-quality

product (a fraction of ), and two, consumers are paying lower prices for each of the firm's track records. Consequently, the mixed-strategy equilibrium will be dominated by a more profitable pure-strategy equilibrium. 34 After the type realization at t 0, different firm types may prefer different branding regimes. Provided that the HE exists, the (C, C)-type firm always prefers umbrella branding, whereas the (I, I) type wants to separate out its record in two markets by adopting independent branding. However, (C, I) and (I, C) sometimes prefers one branding to the other. The online appendix provides an analysis of each firm type's preferred branding regime. 35 The literature on behavior-based pricing (e.g., Villas-Boas 1999, Fudenberg and Tirole 2000, Shin and Sudhir 2010) investigates whether a firm should reward its own and its competitor's customers in a single product market. In this paper, a different CRM problem is examined for a multiproduct firm. 36 P&G released its Super Bowl 2020 advertisement featuring not only its product brands but also the corporate brand. 37 See https://www.ideasbig.com/blog/facebook-rebrands-its-sub -brands/. 38 In fact, the company has a number of products that are highly related on both the demand and supply sides. For instance, P&G sells a laundry detergent (Tide), a dishwashing soap (Dawn), a fabric softener (Downy), and an all-purpose cleaner (Mr. Clean), which serve similar consumer needs to clean and disinfect various objects in the house. Moreover, all these products are liquid cleaning products, which share common ingredients. 39 For example, research has shown that firms can benefit from advertising spillover by using an umbrella brand (e.g., Smith 1992, Smith and Park 1992, Erdem and Sun 2002).
References
Aaker DA, Keller KL (1990) Consumer evaluations of brand extensions. J. Marketing 54(1):27­41.
Andersson F (2002) Pooling reputations. Internat. J. Indust. Organ. 20(5):715­730.
Boush DM, Loken B (1991) A process-tracing study of brand extension evaluation. J. Marketing Res. 28(1):16­28.
Cabral LM (2000) Stretching firm and brand reputation. RAND J. Econom. 31(4):658­673.
Cabral LM (2009) Umbrella branding with imperfect observability and moral hazard. Internat. J. Indust. Organ. 27(2):206­213.
Choi JP (1998) Brand extension as informational leverage. Rev. Econom. Stud. 65(4):655­669.
Erdem T, Sun B (2002) An empirical investigation of spillover effects of marketing mix strategy in umbrella branding. J. Marketing Res. 39(4):408­420.
Fudenberg D, Tirole J (2000) Customer poaching and brand switching. RAND J. Econom. 31(4):634­657.
Hakenes H, Peitz M (2008) Umbrella branding and the provision of quality. Internat. J. Indust. Organ. 26(2):546­556.
Ho¨ rner J (2002) Reputation and competition. Amer. Econom. Rev. 92(3):644­663.
Klein B, Leffler KB (1981) The role of market forces in assuring contractual performance. J. Political Econom. 89(4):615­641.
Kreps DM, Wilson R (1982) Reputation and imperfect information. J. Econom. Theory 27(2):253­279.
Liu Q, Skrzypacz A (2014) Limited records and reputation bubbles. J. Econom. Theory 151(May):2­29.
Mailath GJ, Samuelson L (2001) Who wants a good reputation? Rev. Econom. Stud. 68(2):415­441.
Mayzlin D (2006) Promotional chat on the internet. Marketing Sci. 25(2):155­163.

Yu: A Model of Brand Architecture Choice: A House of Brands vs. A Branded House Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147­167, © 2020 INFORMS

167

Mayzlin D, Shin J (2011) Uninformative advertising as an invitation to search. Marketing Sci. 30(4):666­685.
Miklo´ s-Thal J (2012) Linking reputations through umbrella branding. Quant. Marketing Econom. 10(3):335­374.
Miklo´ s-Thal J, Raith M, Selove M (2018) What are we really good at? Product strategy with uncertain capabilities. Marketing Sci. 37(2): 294­309.
Milgrom P, Roberts J (1982) Predation, reputation, and entry deterrence. J. Econom. Theory 27(2):280­312.
Moorthy S (2012) Can brand extension signal product quality? Marketing Sci. 31(5):756­770.
Neeman Z, O¨ ry A, Yu J (2019) The benefit of collective reputation. RAND J. Econom. 50(4):787­821.
Park CW, Milberg S, Lawson R (1991) Evaluation of brand extensions: The role of product feature similarity and brand concept consistency. J. Consumer Res. 18(2):185­193.
Sappington DE, Wernerfelt B (1985) To brand or not to brand? A theoretical and empirical question. J. Bus. 58(3):279­293.

Shapiro C (1983) Premiums for high quality products as returns to reputations. Quart. J. Econom. 98(4):659­679.
Shin J, Sudhir K (2010) A customer management dilemma: When is it profitable to reward one's own customers? Marketing Sci. 29(4):671­689.
Smith DC (1992) Brand extensions and advertising efficiency: What can and cannot be expected. J. Advertising. Res. 32(6):11­20.
Smith DC, Park CW (1992) The effects of brand extensions on market share and advertising efficiency. J. Marketing Res. 29(3):296­313.
Tauber EM (1981) Brand franchise extension: new product benefits from existing brand names. Bus. Horizons 24(2):36­41.
Villas-Boas JM (1999) Dynamic competition with customer recognition. RAND J. Econom. 30(4):604­631.
Wernerfelt B (1988) Umbrella branding as a signal of new product quality: An example of signalling by posting a bond. RAND J. Econom. 19(3):458­466.
Wolinsky A (1986) True monopolistic competition as a result of imperfect information. Quart. J. Econom. 101(3):493­511.

