http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/mksc/

MARKETING SCIENCE
Vol. 37, No. 6, November­December 2018, pp. 855­882 ISSN 0732-2399 (print), ISSN 1526-548X (online)

Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data

Xiao Liu,a Alan Montgomery,b Kannan Srinivasanb
a Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, New York 10012; b Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213 Contact: xliu@stern.nyu.edu, http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7093-8534 (XL); alanmontgomery@cmu.edu (AM); kannans@cmu.edu,
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5389-8569 (KS)

Received: August 18, 2016 Revised: November 8, 2017; April 19, 2018 Accepted: April 19, 2018 Published Online in Articles in Advance: October 23, 2018
https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2018.1106
Copyright: © 2018 INFORMS

Abstract. In 2012, consumers paid $32 billion in overdraft fees, representing the single largest source of revenue for banks from demand deposit accounts during this period. Owing to consumer attrition caused by overdraft fees and potential government regulations to reform these fees, financial institutions have become motivated to investigate their overdraft fee structures. Banks need to balance the revenue generated from overdraft fees with consumer dissatisfaction and potential churn caused by these fees. However, no empirical research has been conducted to explain consumer responses to overdraft fees or to evaluate alternative pricing strategies associated with these fees. In this research, we propose a dynamic structural model with consumer monitoring costs and dissatisfaction associated with overdraft fees. We apply the model to an enterprise-level data set of more than 500,000 accounts with a history of 450 days, providing a total of 200 million transactions. We find that consumers heavily discount the future and potentially overdraw because of impulsive spending. However, we also find that high monitoring costs hinder consumers' effort to track their balance accurately; consequently, consumers may overdraw because of rational inattention. The large data set is necessary because of the infrequent nature of overdrafts; however, it also engenders computational challenges, which we address by using parallel computing techniques. Our policy simulations show that alternative pricing strategies may increase bank revenue and improve consumer welfare. Fixed bill schedules and overdraft waiver programs may also enhance social welfare. This paper explains consumer responses to overdraft fees and evaluates alternative pricing strategies associated with these fees.

History: K. Sudhir served as the editor-in-chief and Tat Chan served as associate editor for this article. Funding: X. Liu acknowledges support from the Dipankar and Sharmila Chakravarti Fellowship. Supplemental Material: The online appendices are available at https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2018.1106.

Keywords: banking · overdraft fees · dynamic programming · big data

1. Introduction
An overdraft occurs when a consumer spends or withdraws an amount of funds from his or her checking account that exceeds the account's available funds. U.S. banks allow consumers to overdraw their account (subject to some restrictions at the bank's discretion) but charge an overdraft fee (OD). Overdraft fees have been a major source of bank revenue since the early 1980s (Topper 2012), when banks started to offer free checking accounts to attract consumers. According to Moebs Services, the total amount of overdraft fees in the United States reached $32 billion in 2012. This is equivalent to an average of $178 for each checking account annually.1 According to the Center for Responsible Lending, U.S. households spent more on overdraft fees than on fresh vegetables, postage, or books in 2010 (Burns 2010).
Overdraft fees have provoked a storm of consumer dissatisfaction and can induce many consumers who experience these fees to close their accounts.2 The U.S. government has taken actions to regulate overdraft fees

through the Consumer Financial Protection Agency,3 and it may take more drastic steps in the future.4 Therefore, there are pressures throughout the industry for banks to reexamine their overdraft fee practices to prevent churn and better prepare for regulations.
A potential solution for both consumers and banks is to leverage financial transaction data to manage overdrafting and offer new services using these financial transaction data. Financial institutions store massive amounts of information about consumers, commonly referred to as big data, as a by-product of their transactions. In this research, we show how this information can be harnessed with structural economic theories to predict consumers' overdrafting behavior. The largescale of our financial transaction panel data allows us to detect rare events of overdrafts, identify rich consumer heterogeneity, and minimize sampling bias to avoid potential financial losses. Consequently, we propose strategies that can increase both consumer welfare and bank revenue. Our goal is to show that the knowledge

855

856

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

about consumers contained within their financial transaction data can form the basis for improving customer welfare and increasing profitability for the bank by tapping into this underutilized resource for marketing purposes.
The ultimate objective of this paper is to investigate alternative pricing strategies of overdraft fees. Specifically, we tackle the following questions: Is the current overdraft fee structure optimal? How will bank revenue and consumer welfare change under alternative pricing strategies? The answers to these questions rely on our understanding of the decision process underlying consumers' overdrafting behavior. So, we first address the following research questions: Why do consumers overdraw? How do consumers react to overdraft fees?
To study these problems, we obtained anonymized data from a large U.S. bank. The data include over 500,000 accounts with a history of up to 450 days, amounting to 200 million relevant observations. This enterprise-level data set is much larger than those reported in other research studies. Substantively, we find that some consumers are inattentive in monitoring their balances because of the associated high monitoring costs. In contrast, attentive consumers primarily overdraw because they heavily discount future utilities (they are subject to impulsive spending) or use overdrafts to satisfy short-term liquidity constraint. Consumers who are dissatisfied may then leave their bank after being charged high overdraft fees.
These findings suggest that to evaluate the welfare consequences of new policies, we must carefully model consumer demand by taking into account heavy discounting, inattention, and dissatisfaction behaviors. This drives us to make two methodological contributions. First, we construct a dynamic structural model that incorporates inattention and dissatisfaction into the lifetime consumption model. These modeling components are necessary to accurately predict consumers' reactions to new pricing policies and subsequently assess welfare implications. Structural models have the merit of producing policy-invariant parameters that allow us to conduct counterfactual analyses. However, the inherent computational burden prevents them from being widely adopted by the industry. This leads to our second contribution, whereby we show how to estimate a structural model applied to big data with the help of parallel computing techniques. Our proposed algorithm takes advantage of state-of-the-art parallel computing techniques and estimation methods to lessen the computational burden and reduce the curse of dimensionality to the point where near-real-time results are possible.
In our counterfactual analysis, we show that a percentage fee or a quantity premium fee strategy can achieve higher bank revenue than the current flat per-transaction fee strategy because of the demand expansion effect and second degree price discrimination effect. Consumers also

benefit from the lowered overdraft fees by improving their capabilities to smooth out consumption over time and save monitoring costs. Therefore, all the new pricing strategies can improve social welfare. Moreover, a fixed bill payment schedule can also improve social welfare by saving consumers time in monitoring their accounts. Interestingly, an overdraft waiver for high-balance customers can be a win­win for both consumers and the bank.
Consumer choice of financial products is an important and enormous area that has been underresearched in marketing. Providing a strong impetus to new topics for research, this journal's publication policy is favorably disposed to even exploratory research efforts (Sudhir 2016). We believe that our research is on an important and underresearched area, and that our analysis is far beyond what may be deemed as exploratory.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review related research. We report an exploratory data analysis in Section 3 to motivate our model setup. In Section 4, we describe our structural model. We give details about the identification and estimation procedures in Section 5. In Sections 6 and 7, we discuss our estimation results and counterfactual analysis. We conclude in Section 8 with a discussion of our findings and the limitations of our research.
2. Literature Review
An economic approach to explaining overdrafting would assume that consumers are rational and forward-looking with an objective to maximize their total discounted utility by making optimal choices (Modigliani and Brumberg 1954, Hall 1978). Consistent with the rational argument for overdrafting is that consumers heavily discount the future and are willing to pay future overdraft fees to allow consumption today. Although we are sympathetic to full information rational models of consumer behavior, we do not want to overlook potential behavioral explanations of overdrafting behavior. Specifically, we consider two novel arguments that offer behavioral explanations concerning overdrafting: inattention and dissatisfaction.
The inattention argument is present in a large body of literature in psychology and economics, which has found that consumers pay limited attention to relevant information. In their review paper, DellaVigna (2009) summarize findings indicating that consumers pay limited attention to (1) shipping costs, (2) tax (Chetty et al. 2009), and (3) rankings (Pope 2009). Gabaix and Laibson (2006) find that consumers do not pay enough attention to addon pricing, Grubb (2014) shows that consumers are inattentive to their cell-phone minute balances, and Ching et al. (2009) find that consumers only occasionally attend to prices. Many papers in finance and accounting have documented that investors and financial analysts are inattentive to various types of financial information (e.g., Hirshleifer and Teoh 2003, Peng and Xiong 2006).

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

857

Limited attention can also explain overdrafting behaviors, as demonstrated by Stango and Zinman (2014). They state that there is survey evidence that people overdraw accounts because "they `thought there was enough money in my account'" (p. 996). So they define inattention as incomplete consideration of account balances (realized balance and available balance net of upcoming bills) that would inform choices. Although Stango and Zinman (2014) use a data set similar to ours, their aim is to show that reminding participants about overdraft fees can reduce the likelihood of overdrafts. We adopt this definition of inattention, but we introduce inattention through a structural parameter, the monitoring cost (Reis 2006), which represents the time and effort required for a consumer to know the exact amount of money in his or her checking account.
A second behavioral argument related to overdrafting is that it may cause consumer dissatisfaction. The implied interest rate for an overdraft originated by a small transaction amount implies usurious rates that are much higher than the socially accepted interest rate (Matzler et al. 2006), leading to price dissatisfaction. This is because under current banking practices, consumers pay flat per-transaction fees regardless of the transaction amount. Overdrafting fees may cause consumer dissatisfaction, which is one of the main causes of customer switching behavior (Keaveney 1995, Bolton 1998). We conjecture that consumers are likely to close their account after they pay an overdraft fee and/or if the ratio of the overdraft fee to the overdraft transaction amount is high.
Before posing a formal economic model, we begin with the data and an exploratory data analysis to validate whether there is evidence for high discounting, inattention, and dissatisfaction.
3. Data
We obtain anonymized data from a large U.S. bank. Our data comprise bank transaction data for a sample of more than 500,000 accounts5 with more than 200 million transactions over a 15-month period (June 2012 to Aug 2013). These data are a by-product of consumers' financial transactions. For each transaction, we know a unique but anonymized account identifier along with the date, channel, amount, and type of the transaction. Table 1 provides a simulated example of the raw information for a consumer. In this example, the consumer

makes an ATM withdrawal and starts with a positive balance. On the next day, a check is paid by the bank even though the consumer has insufficient funds, which triggers an overdraft and the corresponding fee. A direct deposit from salary income is received, which brings the consumer's balance to a positive amount. Subsequently, the consumer does a balance check and makes a purchase at the supermarket on the next day. The description in this example is given for illustrative purposes and is not provided in our data set. Each transaction is classified into one of five categories: bills, fees assessed by the bank, income (from deposits and transfers), spending, and balance inquiries.
The bank in the data set provides a comprehensive set of services for consumers to avoid overdrafts, such as automatic transfers, but despite these offerings, a significant number of consumers still overdraw. (For a good review of general overdraft practices in the United States, refer to Stango and Zinman (2014). Online Appendix A1 tabulates the current fee settings of the top U.S. banks.) If a consumer overdraws his or her account with the standard overdraft service, then the bank might cover the transaction and charge a $316 OD or decline the transaction and charge a $31 nonsufficient fund fee (NSF). The bank can accept or decline the transaction at its discretion. The OD/NSF is applied at a per-item level: if a consumer performs several transactions when his or her account is already overdrawn, each transaction item will incur a fee of $31. However, within a day, the total number of per-item fees is capped.7 If the account remains overdrawn for several8 consecutive calendar days, a continuous overdraft fee of $6 is assessed. The bank also provides an overdraft protection service, where a checking account can be linked to another checking account, a credit card, or a line of credit. In this case, when the focal account is overdrawn, funds can be transferred to cover the negative balance. The overdraft transfer balance fee is $9 for each transfer. In summary, the overdraft fee structure for the bank, as for most others, is quite complicated. In our empirical analysis, we do not distinguish among different types of overdraft fees, and we assume that consumers care only about the total amount of overdraft fees rather than the underlying pricing structure.
The bank also provides balance-checking services through its branches, ATMs, call centers, and

Table 1. Example of Simulated Transaction Data for an Individual

Date

Description

Channel

Type

+/-

Amount ($)

Balance ($)

11/14/2012

ATM withdrawal

ATM

Spending

-

11/15/2012

Check cashed for electric payment

ACH

Bill

-

11/15/2012

Overdraft item fee

Fee

-

11/16/2012

Salary from direct deposit

ACH

Income

+

11/17/2012

Check balance

ATM

Balance inquiry

O

11/17/2012

Debit card purchase at supermarket

Debit

Spending

-

80.00 130.41 31.00 287.42
97.84

63.15 -67.26 -98.26 189.16 189.16
91.32

858

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

online/mobile banking service. Consumers can inquire about their available balances and recent activities. There is also a notification service, providing so-called "alerts," that notifies consumers via emails or text messages when certain events take place, such as overdrafts, incidents of insufficient funds, transfers, and deposits. Unfortunately, our data set includes only balance-checking data, not alert data. We discuss this limitation in Section 8.
In 2009, the Federal Reserve Board made an amendment to Regulation E (subsequently recodified by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB)), which requires account holders to provide affirmative consent (opt in) for overdraft coverage of ATM and nonrecurring point-of-sale (POS) debit card transactions before banks can charge them for paying such transactions.9 Regulation E was intended to protect consumers from heavy overdraft fees. The change became effective for new accounts on July 1, 2010, and for existing accounts on August 15, 2010. Our data contain both opt-in and opt-out accounts. However, we do not know which accounts have opted in unless we observe an ATM/POS-initiated overdraft incident. We discuss this data limitation in Section 8.
3.1. Descriptive Statistics In our data set, 15.8% of accounts had at least one overdraft incident. The proportion of accounts with overdrafts is lower than the 27% (across all banks and credit unions) reported by the CFPB in 2012.10 Table 2 shows that consumers who paid overdraft fees overdrew nearly 10 times and paid $245 on average during the 15-month sample period. This is consistent with the finding from the CFPB that the average overdraft- and NSF-related fees paid by all accounts with one or more overdraft transactions in 2011 totaled $225.11 There is significant heterogeneity in consumers' overdraft frequency, and the distribution of overdraft frequency is quite skewed. The median overdraft frequency is three, and more than 25% of consumers overdrew only once. In contrast, the top 0.15% of the heaviest overdrafters overdrew more than 100 times. A similar skewed pattern is observed for the distribution of overdraft fees. Whereas the median overdraft fee is $77, the top 0.15% of heaviest overdrafters paid more than $2,730 in fees.
The majority of overdrafters have overdrawn less than 40 times. The first panel in Figure 1 depicts the distribution of the overdraft frequency and fees conditional upon the accountholder overdrafting at least once during the sample period. Notice that most consumers (>50%) overdraft only once or twice. The second

panel shows the distribution censored at $300 for the overdraft fees paid for each accountholder who has overdrawn. Consistent with the fee structure where the standard per-item overdraft fee is $22 or $31, we see spikes at these two numbers and their multiples.
To better understand what types of transactions trigger an overdraft, we construct a table of the transaction channel that triggers overdrafts. We find (in Table 3) that nearly 50% of overdrafts are caused by debit card purchases with mean transaction amounts of approximately $30. On the other hand, Automated Clearing House (ACH) and check transactions account for 13.77% and 11.68% of overdraft incidents, and these transactions are generally for larger amounts, $294.57 and $417.78, respectively. ATM withdrawals lead to another 3.51% of the overdraft transactions, with an average amount of approximately $90.
3.2. Exploratory Data Analysis This section presents some patterns in the data that suggest the causes and effects of overdrafts. We show that heavy discounting and inattention may drive consumers' overdrafting behavior and that consumers are dissatisfied because of overdraft fees. The model-free evidence also highlights the variation in the data that will allow for the identification of the discount factor, monitoring cost, and dissatisfaction sensitivity.
3.2.1. Heavy Discounting. First, we conjecture that a consumer may overdraw because of a much greater preference for current consumption than future consumption, this is, the consumer heavily discounts future consumption utility. At the point of sale, such a consumer sharply discounts the future cost of the overdraft fee to satisfy his or her immediate gratification.12 In such a case, we should observe a steep downward sloping trend in the consumer's spending pattern within a pay period; that is, the consumer will increase spending right after he or she receives a pay check and will then reduce spending over the course of the month. However, because of his or her overspending at the beginning of the month, the consumer will run out of funds at the end of the pay period and have to overdraw.
We test this hypothesis with the following model of spending for consumer i at time t:
Spendingit   LapsedTimeAf terIncomeit + µi + vt + it,
where LapsedTimeAf terIncomeit is the number of days after the consumer received income (salary), µi is the individual

Table 2. Overdraft Frequency and Fee Distribution for Consumers Who Overdraft

OD frequency OD amount

Mean
9.84 $245.46

Standard deviation
18.74 $523.04

Median
3 $77

Minimum
1 $10

99.85 Percentile
>100 >$2,730

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

859

Figure 1. (Color online) Overdraft Frequency and Fee Distribution

fixed effect, and vt is the time (day) fixed effect. To control for the effect that consumers usually pay for their bills (utilities, phone bills, credit card bills, etc.) after receiving their paycheck, we exclude checks and ACH transactions, which are the common choices for bill payments from daily spending and keep only debit card purchases, ATM withdrawals, and person-to-person transfers.

We run this ordinary least squares regression sep-
arately for heavy overdrafters (whose overdraft frequencies are in the top 20 percentile of all overdrafters),
light overdrafters (whose overdraft frequencies are not in
the top 20 percentile), and nonoverdrafters (who do not overdraw during the 15-month sample period).13 The results are reported in columns (1)­(3) of Table 4.

860

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

Table 3. Types of Transactions That Cause Overdraft

Type

Frequency Percentage (%) Amount ($)

Debit card purchase ACH transaction Check ATM withdrawal

946,049 267,854 227,128 68,328

48.65 13.77 11.68 3.51

29.50 294.57 417.78 89.77

Figure 2. (Color online) Overdraft Due to a Balance Perception Error

We find that the coefficient of LapsedTimeAfterIncomeit is negative and significant for heavy overdrafters but not light overdrafters or nonoverdrafters. This suggests that heavy overdrafters have a steep downward sloping spending pattern during a pay period, whereas light overdrafters or nonoverdrafters have a relatively stable spending stream. The heavy overdrafters are likely to overdraw because of their heavy discounting of future consumption.
3.2.2. Inattention. Next, we consider why light overdrafters may overdraft due to inattention. The idea is that consumers might not always monitor their account balance and may be uncertain about the exact balance amount. Sometimes, the perceived balance can be higher than the true balance, and this might cause an overdraft. We first present a representative example of consumer inattention. The example is based on our data, but to protect the privacy of the consumer and the merchants, the amounts have been changed. However, the example remains representative of the underlying data.
As shown in Figure 2, the consumer first received his or her biweekly salary on August 17. After a series of expenses, the consumer is left with $21.16 on August 20. The consumer did not check his or her balance but continued spending and overdrew the account for several small purchases, including a $25 restaurant bill, a $17.12 beauty purchase, a $6.31 game, and a $4.95 coffee purchase. These four transactions totaled only $53.38 but caused the consumer to pay four overdraft item fees for total fees of $124. We speculate that this consumer was careless in monitoring his or her account and overestimated his or her balance.14
Beyond this example, we find more evidence of inattention in the data. To start off, Table 3 suggests that

Table 4. Spending Decreases with Time in a Pay Cycle

Lapsed time after income ()
Fixed effect Number of
observations R2
***p < 0.0001.

(1) Heavy (2) Light

(3)

overdrafters overdrafters Nonoverdrafters

-6.8374*** (0.06923)
Yes 17,810,276

-0.07815 (0.06540)
Yes 53,845,039

-0.02195 (0.02328)
Yes 242,598,851

0.207

0.275

0.280

debit card purchases cause the most overdraft incidences, perhaps because it is more difficult to check balances when using a debit card than using an ATM or ACH.
Moreover, intuitively, as direct support of our hypothesis regarding inattention, the less frequently a consumer checks his or her balance, the more overdraft fees the consumer will likely incur. To test this hypothesis, we estimate the following specification:
TotODPmtit 0 + 1BCFreqit + µi + vt + it,
where TotODPmtit is the total overdraft payment, and BCFreqit is the balance-checking frequency for consumer i at time t (month).
We estimate this model on light overdrafters (whose overdraft frequency is not in the top 20 percentile) and heavy overdrafters (whose overdraft frequency is in the top 20 percentile) separately, and report the result in columns (1) and (2) in Table 5.
The result suggests that a higher frequency of balance checking decreases the overdraft payment for light overdrafters but not for heavy overdrafters. We further test this effect by including the overdraft frequency (ODFreqit) and an interaction term for balancechecking frequency and overdraft frequency BCFreqit  ODFreqit in the equation below. The idea is that if the coefficient for this interaction term is positive while the coefficient for balance-checking frequency (BCFreqit) is negative, then it implies that a high frequency of balance checking decreases overdraft fees only for consumers who overdraw infrequently, not for those who overdraw frequently:
TotODPmtit 0 + 1BCFreqit + 2ODFreqi + 3BCFreqit  ODFreqi + vt + it.

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

861

Table 5. Frequent Balance Checking Reduces Overdrafts for Light Overdrafters

(1) Light (2) Heavy

(3) All

overdrafters overdrafters overdrafters

Balance-checking frequency (BCFreq, 1)
Overdraft frequency (ODFreq, 2)
BCFreq  ODFreq (3)

-0.5001*** (0.0391)

Number of observations 1,794,835

R2

0.1417

-0.1389 (0.0894)
593,676 0.1563

-0.6823*** (0.0882)
16.0294*** (0.2819)
0.278136*** (0.0607)
2,388,511 0.6742

Notes. Fixed effects at the individual and day levels are shown. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
***p < 0.0001.

The results in column (3) of Table 5 confirm our hypothesis.15
Interestingly, we find that consumers' balance perception error accumulates over time in the sense that the greater the time elapsed without checking their balance, the more likely they are to overdraw and consequently pay higher amounts in overdraft fees. Figure 3 exhibits the overdraft probability across the number of days elapsed since the last time a consumer checked his or her balance for light overdrafters (whose overdraft frequency is not in the top 20 percentile). As the figure shows, the

overdraft probability increases moderately with the
number of days elapsed since the last balance check. We confirm this relationship with the following two
specifications. We assume that the overdraft incidence I(OD)it (where I(OD)it 1 denotes overdraft and I(OD)it 0 denotes no overdraft) and overdraft fee payment amount ODFeeit for consumer i at time t can be modeled as

I(OD)it OD F e eit

(0 + 1DaysSinceLastBalanceCheckit + 2BeginBalit + µi + vt), 0 + 1DaysSinceLastBalanceCheckit + 2BeginBalit + µi + vt + it,

where  is the cumulative distribution function for a standard normal distribution. The term DaysSinceLastBalance Checkit denotes the number of days that consumer i has not checked his or her balance until time t, and BeginBalit is the beginning balance at time t. We control for the beginning balance because it may be negatively correlated with the days elapsed since last balance check because consumers tend to check their balance when it is low, and a lower balance often leads to an overdraft. Table 6 reports the estimation results, which support our hypothesis that the greater the time elapsed after a balance check, the more likely the consumer is to overdraw and incur higher overdraft fees.

Figure 3. (Color online) Overdraft Likelihood Increases with Time Elapsed Since the Last Balance Check

862

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

Table 6. Reduced-Form Evidence of the Existence of Monitoring Costs

I (OD)

ODFee

Days since last balance check (1)
Beginning balance (2)
Individual fixed effect Time fixed effect Number of observations R2

0.0415*** (0.0027)
-0.7265*** (0.0066)
Yes Yes 53,845,039 0.5971

0.0003*** (0.0001)
-0.0439*** (0.0038)
Yes Yes 53,845,039 0.6448

Notes. The estimation sample includes only overdrafters. Marginal effects for the probit model are shown. Fixed effects are for the individual and day levels. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
***p < 0.0001.

If balance checking can help prevent overdrafts, why do consumers not check their balance more frequently and avoid overdraft fees? We argue that there exists a monitoring cost because monitoring account balance is costly in terms of time, effort and mental resources, which reduces the number of balance checks. In the data, we find that consumers with online banking accounts check their balances more frequently than those without online banking accounts, suggesting that monitoring costs exist and that consumers monitor their account more frequently when these costs are reduced. Please see the details in Online Appendix A2.

3.2.3. Dissatisfaction. We find that overdrafts might cause consumers to close their accounts (Table 7). Among nonoverdrafters, 7.87% closed their accounts during the sample period. This ratio is much higher for overdrafters. Specifically, 23.36% of heavy overdrafters (whose overdraft frequency is in the top 20 percentile) closed their accounts, whereas 10.56% of light overdrafters (whose overdraft frequency is not in the top 20 percentile) closed their accounts.
From the description field associated with each account, we can distinguish the cause of account closure: forced closure by the bank because the consumer is unable or unwilling to pay back the overdrawn balance and fees (in which case the bank executes a charge-off) versus voluntary closure. Among heavy overdrafters, 13.66% closed their accounts voluntarily, and the remaining 86.34% were forced by the bank to close their accounts (Table 8). In contrast, 47.42% of the light

Table 7. Account Closure Frequency for Overdrafters vs. Nonoverdrafters

Heavy overdrafters Light overdrafters Nonoverdrafters

% Closed
23.36% 10.56% 7.87%

Table 8. Closure Reasons

Overdraft forced closure (%)

Overdraft voluntary closure (%)

No overdraft voluntary closure (%)

Heavy overdrafters
Light overdrafters
Nonoverdrafters

86.34 52.58
--

13.66 47.42
--

-- -- 100.00

Notes. Nonoverdrafters might voluntarily close for reasons such as dwelling location change and account consolidation. Because of a lack of data, we cannot explain why nonoverdrafters are more likely to voluntarily close than light overdrafters.

overdrafters closed their accounts voluntarily. We conjecture that the higher voluntary closures among light overdrafters may be due to customer dissatisfaction with the bank, as the evidence below shows.
First, we find that overdrafters who voluntarily closed their accounts were very likely to close soon after the last overdraft. In Figure 4, we plot the histogram of the number of days it took the account to close after the last overdraft incident. As the figure shows, more than 60% of accounts closed within 30 days after the last overdraft incident.
Second, light overdrafters are also more likely to close their accounts when the ratio of the overdraft fee to the transaction amount that caused the overdraft fee is higher. In other words, the higher the ratio of the overdraft amount, the more likely a consumer will be to close his or her account. We show this pattern in the left panel of Figure 5. However, this effect does not seem to be present for heavy overdrafters (right panel of Figure 5).

4. Model
Our exploratory data analysis indicates that heavy discounting and inattention can help explain consumers' overdrafting behavior and that consumers' dissatisfaction due to overdraft fees contributes to their attrition. Ultimately, our goal is to predict the overdraft incidence for each consumer on a daily basis. To do so, we develop a structural model that incorporates discounting, inattention, and dissatisfaction. This is a dynamic model in which consumers make daily decisions about how to spend their funds, whether to check their balance, and whether to close their account. We assume that consumers are rational and forward looking,16 with an objective to maximize their total discounted utility by making optimal choices. As by-products of this model, we make a prediction about the likelihood of an overdraft on any given day for each consumer as well as the consumer's tenure and profitability with the bank.
The timing of the events for our model is illustrated in Figure 6. On each day for every consumer, the model has seven steps. First, the consumer receives income (if any). Second, the consumer's bills arrive (if any).

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

863

Figure 4. (Color online) Days to Closure After Last Overdraft

Third, the consumer decides whether to check his or her balance. If the consumer inquiries about his or her balance, then the beginning balance and bills for the day are known with complete certainty; otherwise, the consumer forms an estimate of both the beginning balance and the bill amount. Fourth, the consumer makes discretionary spending decisions and spends or consumes this amount. At this stage, the consumer chooses consumption (C) to maximize the total discounted utility (V) if the consumer chooses to check the

balance or chooses it to maximize the expected discounted utility (E[V]) if the balance is not checked. Fifth, an overdraft fee is assessed by the bank if the ending balance is below zero. Sixth, the bank decides whether to force the account to close. Based on the bank's risk assessment, if the account is associated with high risk activities, it will be forced to close and the consumer will get zero utility (normalized). The bank will incur a default cost, which equals the negative balance of the account, in this case. Seventh, the consumer decides whether to close

Figure 5. (Color online) Percentage of Accounts Closed Increases with Fee/Transaction Amount Ratio

864

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

Figure 6. Timing of Events Within Our Model for Each Day

the account (after paying any overdraft fees). If the consumer closes his or her account, then an outside option is received and the model ends. Otherwise, in the eighth step, the balance is updated, and the cycle of events is repeated daily.17
To fully implement this multistage model, we have to specify a number of components concerning utility. To make it easier for the reader to follow the specification of the model, we do not start with its full specification, but instead build up the model starting with the utility from consumption in Section 4.1. We then incorporate adjustments to utility of not knowing the balance with certainty, which incorporates monitoring costs that capture inattention in Section 4.2. Finally, we introduce dissatisfaction with overdraft fees into utility in Section 4.3 so that we can predict not only when overdrafts occur but also when consumers will close their accounts. The full dynamic programming problem that considers the net present value of utility for an individual consumer is presented in Sections 4.4 and 4.5. Finally, we consider how heterogeneity across consumers

can be specified in Section 4.6 to complete the full specification of the model. The estimation of the model is discussed in Section 5.

4.1. Consumption Model

At the core of our model is the need to predict consumers'

daily decisions about how much to consume today

versus in the future. Following the lifetime consumption

literature (Modigliani and Brumberg 1954, Hall 1978), we assume that consumer i's per-period consumption

utility at time t is determined by a constant relative risk

averse (CRRA) utility function (Arrow 1963):

uC(Cit)

C1it-it 1 - it

,

(1)

where Cit18 is consumer i's consumption at period t, and

it is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. We choose

the CRRA utility function because it has the merits of

empirical support (Friend and Blume 1975), analytical

convenience (Merton 1992), and is commonly used in the economics literature. The coefficient of relative risk

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

865

aversion

is

always

positive,

and

its

inverse

1 it

is

the

in-

tertemporal substitution elasticity between consumption

in any two adjacent periods. Higher values for it imply

greater utility from each marginal unit of consumption

and a lower willingness to substitute today's consumption

for future consumption.

Given that consumers might overdraw because of

emergency expenses, for example, medical bills, car repairs,

or expensive group dinners, we allow it to vary each period according to a random shock term it to capture

these unexpected needs for consumption. Large positive

values of it will result in increased marginal utilities of

consumption, representing days when urgent expenses

are due. Specifically, we allow it to follow a log-normal
distribution with a time-invariant location i and a random
shock it. The shock it follows a normal distribution with mean zero and variance 2i (Yao et al. 2012):

it exp(i + it), it~N(0, 2i ).

The consumption plan captured by Cit depends on the consumer's budget constraint, which is a function of the consumer's current balance Bit, income Yit, and bills it. Bills represent preauthorized spending that relates to medium- or long-run consumption expen-
ditures such as loan, rent, or utility payments. We model bills separately19 from consumption because preauthorized spending is difficult to change on a daily basis after it is
authorized, whereas consumption is more likely to be the result of consumers' day-to-day decisions. Consumers'
budget constraints are as follows:

Bit+1 Bit - Cit - ODit  I(Bit - Cit < 0) + Yit+1 - it+1.
(2)
The next day's available balance Bit+1 is equal to the current balance Bit minus current consumption Cit and overdraft fees ODit (if the balance becomes negative, denoted by (Bit - Cit < 0)) plus the next day's net income after bills, given by the difference of Yit+1 and it+1. Note that because we model consumers' spending decisions at the daily level rather than the transaction level, we aggregate all overdraft fees paid and assume that consumers know the per-item fee structure20 stated in Section 3 when deciding their daily consumption; that is, ODit is not the per-item overdraft fee ($31 for our focal bank), but the daily sum of all per-item overdraft fees. Thus, ODit can take a value such as $62, $93, or $124.
Because our focus is overdrafting behavior, we make a number of assumptions to render our problem tractable. First, consumption is not observed in our data; therefore, we make the assumption that spending is equivalent to consumption in terms of generating utility. Hereafter, we use consumption and spending interchangeably. Second, we abstract away from the complexity

associated with our data and assume that the consumer's income and bills are exogenously determined. In our data set, we are able to distinguish bills from spending using their transaction channels, as illustrated in Table 1. For example, bills are associated with checks and ACH and bill payments, whereas spending is associated with debit cards and cash withdrawals. Note that although credit card spending is discretionary, we treat it as a bill because it affects the checking account balance only when the consumer pays the bill rather than when the consumer swipes the credit card each time. Thus, credit card spending does not cause any immediate overdrafts, whereas debit card purchases may. It is for this reason that we treat credit card and debit card spending differently. The main focus of our paper is to examine overdrafts. Thus, the transactions are modeled according to the extent that they affect overdrafts. Third, we assume that bills are not within consumers' daily discretion but that spending (or, more precisely, nonpreauthorized spending) can be adjusted daily. In summary, we model consumers' consumption decisions, where consumption is nonpreauthorized spending21 from their checking accounts.
4.2. Inattention and Monitoring Costs
Our reduced-form evidence in Section 3.2.2 suggests that because of monitoring costs, consumers are inattentive to their financial well-being. This is consistent with the theory of rational inattention (Sims 1998, 2003) that individuals have many things to think about and limited time, and they can devote only limited intellectual resources to these tasks of data gathering and analysis. Because monitoring an account balance22 takes time and effort, a consumer may not check his balance frequently enough to avoid overdrafts. To capture this effect, we assume that consumers are rational inattentive23 in the sense that they are aware of their own inattention and may choose to be inattentive if monitoring costs are high (Grubb 2014). Specifically, we model consumers' balance-checking behavior as a binary choice: Qit  {1,0}, where 1 denotes the decision to check the balance and 0 denotes the decision not to check.
The balance-checking activity affects the consumer's balance perception Bt. As shown in Equation (2), the available balance Bt+1 is the income net of preauthorized bills it+1. We assume that consumers are not fully aware of the bill arrival timing and amount. For example, because of the business day schedule, a credit card bill might arrive on any day in the last few days of a month or the first few days of a month. And the amount of a utility bill may vary by season. Therefore consumers have uncertainty of the exact bill, and henceforth the available balance. On the one hand, if a consumer checks his balance by incurring a monitoring cost (to be explained later), then the available balance Bit

866

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

will be known with certainty. On the other hand, if the
consumer does not check his balance, he will recall
a perceived balance, which gives a noisy measure of true balance;24 that is,

Bt Bit

if Qit 1,

Bt ~ N(Bit + itit, 2it) if Qit 0.

(3)

Following Mehta et al. (2004), we allow the per-

ceived balance Bt when the balance is not checked to be

a normally distributed random variable. The mean of

Bt is the sum of the true balance Bit and a perception

error: itit . The first component of the perception error

triitbiustiaonra,2n5daonmd

draw from the standard normal disthe second component is the standard

deviation of the perception error, it. The variance of Bt is 2t , which measures the extent of uncertainty.
For notational convenience, we introduce a variable

it that measures the time (number of days) elapsed since the consumer last checked the balance. By defi-

nition, it+1 (1 + it)(1 - Qit); that is, if a consumer

checks the balance (Qit 1), then the time lapsed since

last balance check is 0, but if the consumer does not

check the balance (Qit 0), the time elapsed increases

by one day. Based on the evidence from our explor-

atory data analysis, we allow the extent of uncertainty

of the perceived balance to accumulate over time, which

implies that the longer a consumer goes without

checking his balance, the more inaccurate the perceived

balance will be. We formulate this statement as

2it iit,

(4)

where t denotes the time elapsed since the consumer last checked his balance and  denotes the sensitivity to the time elapsed since the last balance check.26
Recall that a consumer incurs the monitoring cost to
check the balance. The monitoring cost is an opportunity
cost, not an explicit cost charged by the bank. Formally,
we calculate the consumption utility based on this monitoring cost:

ut(Cit, Qit, Bt) uC(Cit, Bt) - Qit i + itQit,

(5)

where i is the consumer's monitoring cost, and itQit is the idiosyncratic shock that affects his monitoring cost.
The shock itQit can capture idiosyncratic events such as

vacations, during which it is difficult for consumers to

monitor their balances, or it could capture increased

awareness about consumers' financial states from other

events such as online bill payments, which automatically

report their balances. The equation implies that if a con-

sumer checks his balance, then the utility decreases by

a

monetary

equivalence

of

|(1

-

it

)

i

|

1 1-it

.

We

assume

that itQit are independent and identically distributed

(i.i.d.) and follow a type I extreme value distribution.

The consumer does not know the balance perception

error (it and Bt), so he forms an expected utility based on his knowledge about the distribution of their per-

ception error. The optimal spending will maximize his

expected utility, which is calculated by integrating over

the balance perception error:



uit

ut(Cit, Qit, Bt)dF(it)dF(Bt).

(6)

The expected utility uit is decreasing with the variance in the perception error 2it (through Bt; see Equation (4)). This relationship arises because greater variance in the perception error decreases the accuracy of the consumer's
estimate of his true balance and thus increases the
likelihood that he will mistakenly overdraw his account,
which lowers his utility. The derivation is shown in
a technical report available from the authors.

4.3. Forced Closure
As Table 9 suggests, the bank often forces an account to close once an overdraft occurs. Therefore, when a consumer overdraws, he faces the risk of being forced out of the bank. To take this into account, we add the probability of forced closure into the model and denote it by f . Specifically, after a consumer decides how much to consumer or spend (C), if an overdraft occurs, he faces a lottery of forced closure. With probability f he will be forced to leave the bank and obtain the outside option 1 (to be differentiated from the other outside option 2 after voluntary closure; we normalize the outside option 1 to be 0), whereas with probability 1 - f the bank will keep the account open and the consumer will make the next decision of whether to voluntarily close the account. We found the data evidence that an account is more likely to be forced to close when the overdraft payment due is high.27 Therefore, we model f i  ODit,28 and i is the parameter to be estimated.

Table 9. Model Comparison

A: No forward looking B: No inattention C: No heterogeneity D: Proposed

log-marginal density Hit rate: overdraft Hit rate: check balance Hit rate: close account

-2,937.50 0.539 0.425 0.670

-3,625.43 0.385 0.242 0.746

-2,749.95 0.516 0.647 0.681

-1,741.91 0.882 0.846 0.782

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

867

4.4. Dissatisfaction and Account Closing
The exploratory analysis in Section 3.2.3 suggests that overdrafts trigger consumer dissatisfaction and attrition. We model attrition as consumers choosing an outside option of closing their account and switching to a competing bank or becoming unbanked. Based on the data pattern in Figure 5, we make an assumption that consumers are sensitive to the ratio of the overdraft fee to the overdraft transaction amount, and we use it to denote this ratio as a state variable. We assume that a larger ratio indicates a higher likelihood that the consumer will be dissatisfied, because the ratio is essentially the implicit price (interest rate) of overdrafts, and prior research (Keaveney 1995, Bolton 1998) has documented that a high price may cause consumer dissatisfaction. Forward-looking consumers anticipate the accumulation of dissatisfaction (as well as lost consumption utility due to overdrafts) in the future and will become more likely to close their accounts. Furthermore, we assume that consumers formulate their belief of the ratio for a future period based on the highest ratio they have personally incurred;29 that is, if we use it to denote the per-period ratio, then

it

ODit ,

|Bt - Cit|

and

E[it+1|it] max(it, it).

(7)

This assumption is made based on the findings from Tversky and Kahneman (1973), Nwokoye (1975), Monroe (1990), and Fiske and Taylor (1991) that extremely high prices are comparatively distinct, more salient, and easier to retrieve from memory, so that they are more likely to be used as anchors in memory-based tasks. This assumption also reflects consumers' learning behavior over time. Consider a consumer who experiences many overdrafts; our model captures the idea that his dissatisfaction grows with each overdraft.
To introduce dissatisfaction from overdrafts into the model, we calculate the per-period utility:

Ut uit - i  max(it, it)  I[Bt - Cit < 0].

In the above equation, uit is defined as in Equation (6), and i is the dissatisfaction sensitivity, that is, the impact of charging an overdraft fee on a consumer's
decision to close the account. As in Equation (6), we
integrate out the balance perception error to get the
expected utility:



Uit

Ut(Cit, Qit, Bt)dF(it)dF(Bt).

(8)

We assume that the decision to close the account is a terminal decision. Once a consumer chooses to close

his or her account, their value function (or total discounted utility function) equals an outside option with a mean value of i, normalized to be the same across states for identification purposes.30 If the consumer keeps the account open, continuation values from future per-period utility functions will continue to be received. More specifically, let Wi denote a consumer's choice to close his or her account, where Wi 1 denotes the decision to close the account before the period starts, and Wi 0 denotes the decision to keep the account open for this period. Then, the value function for the
consumer becomes

{Uit + ^it0 + i E[Vit+1 |Sit]}{(1 - f )

Vit

 I[Bt - Cit < 0] + I[Bt - Cit  0]}, Wit 0

i + ^it1, Wit 1

(9)

where ^it0 and ^it1 are the idiosyncratic shocks that determine a consumer's account-closing decision. Sour-
ces of shocks may include events such as when the
consumer moves out of town or when a competing bank
enters the market. We assume that these shocks follow
a type I extreme value distribution. Note that even when
a consumer decides to keep the account open, the bank might force the account to close with probability f when the account is overdrawn. So, in expectation, the consumer's value function is {Uit + ^it0 + i E[Vit+1 |Sit]} {(1 - f )  I[Bt - Cit < 0] + I[Bt - Cit  0]}.

4.5. State Variables In this subsection, we formalize the statistical properties associated with the state variables so that we can complete the specification by stating consumers' expectations about their future state.
Income. Consumer accounts tend to have regular spikes in deposits that correspond with monthly, weekly, or biweekly periods. Specifically, we assume that the distribution for income is
Yit Yi  I(DLit PCi),
where Yi is the stable periodic (monthly/weekly/ biweekly) income, DLit is the number of days left until the next payday, and PCi is the length of the pay cycle. The transition process of DLi is deterministic DLit+1 DLit - 1 + PCi  I(DLit 1), decreasing by one for each period ahead and returning to the full length when one pay cycle ends.
Overdraft fee. The state variable ODit is assumed to be i.i.d. over time31 and to follow a discrete distribution with the support vector and probability vector {Xi, pi}. The support vector contains multiples of the per-item overdraft fee.

868

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

Bills. Our data suggests that the bills arrival dates vary considerably. For example, depending on the business day schedule, monthly credit card bills can arrive on any day between the 27th day of the month and 3rd day of the consecutive month. In addition, even when the date is fixed, the amount varies. For example, in many areas, utility bills in the winter are much higher than those in the summer. Given the stochastic nature of the timing and amount of bills, we treat bill arrival dates as a random variable, which we model as a Poisson process. Specifically, bills are assumed to be i.i.d. draws from a compound Poisson distribution with arrival rate i and with a jump size distribution Gi: it ~ CP(i, Gi). This distribution can capture the pattern of bills arriving randomly according to a Poisson process, and bill sizes are sums of fixed components (each separate bill).32 This model setup is consistent with the lifetime consumption model with unanticipated and transitory income shocks.33 When consumers move money from a savings account to a checking account, this is recorded as a negative bill, which increases the available budget. Savings (and ATM deposits) are modeled in the same way as bills. This is because in the data, savings are recorded as either cross-institution ACH transactions or within-bank transfers, similarly to bills. Moreover, we treat savings similarly to bills because, although both generate consumption utility for consumers, they are usually preauthorized and do not cause any immediate overdrafts. People usually do not make retirement and other long-term savings decisions on a daily basis. However, overdrafts result from negative balances on a daily level. The main purpose of our paper is to examine overdrafts. Thus, transactions are modeled based on the extent to which they affect overdrafts.
Dissatisfaction. The ratio of the overdraft fee to the overdraft transaction amount evolves by keeping the maximum amount over time (see Equation (7)).
Open status. The account status is denoted by OPit. If OPit 1, then the account is open. If OPit 0, then the account is closed. The transition of this state variable is deterministic:

 0, if OPit 0,

f (OPit+1|OPit, Wit)



1, 0,

if Wit if Wit

0 and OPit 1 and OPit

1, 1.

Random errors. The shocks it, it and ^it are all assumed to be i.i.d. over time.
In summary, the whole state space for consumers is Sit {Bt,34 it, Yit, DLit, ODit, it, it, OPit, it, it, ^it}. In our data set, we observe St {Bit, it, Yit, DLit, ODit, it, it, OPit}, and our unobservable state variables
are St {Bt, it, it, it, ^it}. So Sit St  St\{Bit, it}.

Notice here that consumers also have unobserved states
Bit and it due to inattention. If a consumer checks his balance, then the true balance (Bit) and bill amount (it) are known; otherwise, a perceived balance (Bt) and expected bill (it) are known.

4.6. The Dynamic Optimization Problem and
Intertemporal Trade-off
We can now state the complete optimization problem facing each consumer. Each consumer chooses an infinite sequence of decision rules {Cit, Qit, Wit}t1 to maximize the expected total discounted utility:

max E {Cit,Qit,Wit}t0 {Sit}t0


tiUt(Cit, Qit, Wit, Sit)|
t0

Ci0, Qi0, Wi0, Si0 ,

where Ut(Cit, Qit, Wit, Sit)



C1it-it 1 - it

- Qit i + itQit

- i  max(it, it)

 I[Bt - Cit < 0] + ^it0

 {(1 - f )  I[Bt - Cit < 0] + I[Bt - Cit  0]} dF(it)dF(Bt)

 (1 - Wit) + (i + ^it1)Wit  OPit.

Let V(Sit) denote the value function:

V(Sit)

max E {Ci,Qi,Wi} t {Si} t+1 Ut(Cit, Qit, Wit, Sit)



+

i-tU(Ci, Qi, Wi, Si)| Cit, Qit, Wit, Sit .

 t+1

(10)

This infinite period dynamic optimization problem can be solved through the Bellman (1957) equation:

V(Sit)

max
Ci ,Qi ,Wi

ESit+1

{U(Ci

,

Qi

,

Wi

,

Sit

)

+ V(Sit+1)|Ci, Qi, Wi, Sit} .

(11)

In the infinite horizon dynamic programming problem, the policy function does not depend on time. We can thus eliminate the time subscript.

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

869

Consequently, we have the following choice-specific value function:35

v(C, Q, W, B~ , , Y, DL, OD, , , OP, , , ^)

 

{(1 - f )  I[B - C < 0] + I[B - C  0]}

·

uC(C) -  +

1 -   max

,

OD



I[B - C |B - C|

<

0]

+ ^0 +  ES+1 V(B~ +1, +1, Y+1, DL+1, OD+1, 1, +1,

1, +1, +1, ^+1)|C, Q, W, B~ , , Y,

DL, OD, , , 1, , , ^ ,

if Q 1 and W 0

{(1 - f )  I[B~ - C < 0] + I[B~ - C  0]}

·

uC(C) + 0 -   max

,

OD

 I[B~ - C |B~ - C|

<

0]

+ ^0 +  ES+1 V(B~ +1, +1, Y+1, DL+1, OD+1,  + 1,

+1, 1, +1, +1, ^+1)|C, Q, W, B~ , , Y, DL, OD, , , 1, , , ^ dF()dF(B~ ),

a + ^1,

if Q 0 and W 0 if W 1

where subscript "+1" denotes the next time period. Therefore, the optimal policy is

{Ci , Qi , Wi} arg max v(Ci, Qi, Wi, B, i, Yi, DLi, ODi, i, i, OPi, i, i, ^i).

We note that a distinction exists between this dynamic

programming problem and traditional ones. Because of

the perception error, a consumer observes B~ it Bit + itit

but does not know Bit or it. The consumer knows only

the distribution Ci (B~ it) based on

(Bit + itit, 2it the perceived

) and makes balance B~ it .

a decision However,

we--as analysts--do not know the realized percep-

tociononlnysuetmrhraoetrr'sCisit(.pB~Weint)edmionbagsxCeimriv(iBe~ziett)sh. eTthhtreeureeexfopbreaeclt,aenwdceeexcBaaintnataenssdvuatmlhueee function. Later, we look for parameters that make the likelihood of Ci (B~ it), which maximizes the expected ex ante value function, reach its maximum. Following

Rust (1987), we obtain the ex ante value function that

integrates out the cost shocks, preference shocks,

account-closing shocks, and unobserved mean balance error:
EV(Bi, i, Yi, DLi, ODi, i, i, OPi)

v(Ci , Qi , Wi, B, i, Yi, DLi, ODi, i, i, OPi,
i, i, ^i) dididid^i.
In summary, consumers' intertemporal trade-offs are associated with three dynamic decisions. First, given the budget constraint, a consumer will evaluate the utility of spending (or consuming) today versus tomorrow. Higher spending today implies lower spending in the future. Therefore, spending is a dynamic decision, and the optimal choice for the consumer is to smooth out his or her consumption over time. Second, when deciding when to check his or her balance, the consumer compares the monitoring cost with the expected gain from avoiding an overdraft fee. The consumer checks his or her balance only when the expected overdraft fee is higher than the monitoring cost. Because the consumer's balance perception error might accumulate over time, the consumer's overdraft probability also increases as more time elapses since the last balance check. As a result, the consumer waits until the overdraft probability reaches a certain threshold (when the expected overdraft fee equals the monitoring cost) before checking the balance. Finally, the decision to close the account is an optimal stopping problem. The consumer will compare the total discounted utility of keeping the account with the utility from the outside option to close the account. When the consumer expects to incur many overdraft fees and the accompanying dissatisfaction, the consumer finds it more attractive to take the outside option and close his or her account.
4.7. Heterogeneity In our data, consumers exhibit different responses to their state conditions. For example, some consumers have never checked their balance and frequently overdraw, whereas other consumers frequently check their balance and rarely overdraw. We hypothesize that these differences result from their heterogeneous discount factors and monitoring costs. Therefore, our model needs to account for unobserved heterogeneity. We follow a hierarchical Bayesian framework (Rossi et al. 2005) and incorporate heterogeneity into the model by assuming that all parameters, namely, i (mean relative risk averse coefficient), i (discount factor), i (standard deviation of the coefficient of risk aversion), i (monitoring cost), i (sensitivity of the error variance to the time elapsed since the last balance check), i (dissatisfaction sensitivity), and i (mean value of the outside

870

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

option) each have a random coefficient specification. The
subscript i denotes the consumer, and the previous models are understood to be defined by the customer. For each of these parameters,   {i, i, i, i, i, i, i, i}, the prior distribution is defined as  ~ N(µ, 2). The hyper-prior distribution is assumed to be diffuse.

5. Identification and Estimation

5.1. Identification

The unknown structural parameters in the model

include {i, i, i, i, i, i, i}, where i is the logarithm of the mean of the coefficient of risk aversion, i is the discount factor, i is the standard deviation of the coefficient of risk aversion, i is the monitoring cost, i is the sensitivity of the balance error variance to the time elapsed since the last balance check, i is the dissatisfaction sensitivity, i is the mean value of the outside option, and i is the forced closure
probability sensitivity to overdraft fee payment. We

provide the rationale for the identification of each

parameter.

We know from Rust (1987) that the discount factor

i cannot be separately identified from the static utility parameter, which is the risk aversion coefficient in

our case. The reason is that lowering i tends to increase consumption/spending, an effect that can also

be achieved by lowering i. Because we are more interested in consumers' time preference than their risk

preference, we fix the risk aversion coefficient, which allows us to identify the discount factor.36 This practice

is also used by Gopalakrishnan et al. (2014). Following

the latest research by Andersen et al. (2008), who jointly

elicit risk and time preferences, we choose i  0.74 for the coefficient of risk aversion.37 After we fix i,
i can be well identified by the sequences of consumption (spending) within a pay period. A large dis-

count factor (close to 1) implies a stable consumption

stream, whereas a small discount factor implies a

downward-sloping consumption stream. Because a

discount factor is constrained above by 1, we take

a logit transformation, namely, i

1 1+exp(i

),

and

es-

timate the transformed parameter i instead.

The standard deviation of the coefficient risk aver-

sion i is identified by the variation of consumptions on the same day of the pay period but across different pay

periods. Moreover, according to the intertemporal trade-

off, the longer the consumer goes without checking his or

her balance, the more likely an overdraft is to occur

because of a balance error. Therefore, the observed data

pattern of higher overdraft fees paid for a longer period

after the balance is checked can inform the structural

parameter i. Intuitively, the monitoring cost i is identified by the
expected overdraft payment amount. Recall that the

trade-off regarding balance checking is that a consumer

checks his or her balance only when i is smaller than the expected overdraft payment amount. In the data, we observe the balance-checking frequency. By combining this with the calculated i, we can compute the expected overdraft probability and then the expected overdraft payment amount, which is the identified i. Given i, a consumer with few balance-checking inquiries must have a higher balance-checking cost i. The dissatisfaction sensitivity parameter i can be identified by the data pattern where consumers' account closure probability varies with the ratio of the overdraft fee to the overdraft transaction amount, as shown in our exploratory data analysis (Section 3.2.3). Last, the mean value of the outside option i can be identified by the average voluntary account closing probability, and i can be identified by the variation of the forced closure probability with respect to the variation of overdraft fee payment.
Note that aside from these structural parameters, another set of parameters governs the transition process. These parameters can be identified prior to the structural estimation from the observed state variables in our data. The set includes {i, Gi, Xi, pi}.
In summary, the structural parameters to be estimated include {i, i, i, i, i, i, i}.
5.2. Likelihood
The full likelihood function is

Lik elihood

L({{Cit, Qit, Wit|St}Tt 1}Ii 1) L({f {St|St-1, Cit-1, Qit-1, Wit-1}Tt 1}Ii 1) · L({S0}Ii 1),

where St {Bit, it, Yit, DLit, ODit, it, it, OPit}. Because the likelihood for the optimal choice and that for the

state transition process are additively separable when

we apply a log transformation to the likelihood func-

tion, we can first estimate the state transition process

from the data and then maximize the likelihood for the

optimal choice. The likelihood function for the optimal

choice is

L({{Cit, Qit, Wit|St}Tt 1}Ii 1)

IT
  L{Cit, Qit, Wit|St}

i 1t 1

IT
  f {Cit|Qit, WitSt}Pr{Qit|Wit, Sit}Pr{Wit|St},
i 1t 1

where f {Cit|Qit, Wit, St} is estimated from the normal kernel density estimator (explained in Online Appendix A3), and Pr{Qit|Wit, St} and Pr{Wit|St} can be written as

Pr(Qit|Wit 0, St) EVQit(Bit, it, Yit, DLit, ODit, it, it, OPit),38

Pr(Wit|St) EVWit(Bit, it, Yit, DLit, ODit, it, it, OPit),

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

871

where EVQit and EVWit denote the partial derivatives of EV with respect to Ut(Cit, Qit, Wit, Sit) and Ut(Cit, Qit, Wit, Sit), respectively.39
5.3. Initial Conditions For each consumer i, we simulate the model for 60 initial periods to derive the initial state variables. Then, we proceed to construct the likelihood increment for consumer i.
5.4. Estimation Using the Imai et al. (2009) Algorithm We aim to estimate our infinite horizon dynamic structural model on a large data set, and we want to obtain individual responses so that we can recommend targeted marketing strategies. We investigate several estimation methods, including the nested fixed point algorithm (Rust 1987), the conditional choice probability estimation (Arcidiacono and Miller 2011), and the Bayesian estimation method developed by Imai et al. (2009) (hereafter, IJC). We adopt the IJC method for the following reasons. First, the hierarchical Bayes framework fits our goal of obtaining heterogeneous parameters. Second, we apply the model to a large data set, so the estimation is computationally challenging. Fortunately, Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) can be combined with a parallel computing technique to reduce the computational burden. Third, the IJC algorithm is the state-of-the-art Bayesian estimation algorithm for infinite horizon dynamic programming models. The IJC algorithm provides two additional benefits in tackling the computational challenges. One is that it alleviates the computational burden by evaluating the value function only once in each epoch. Essentially, the algorithm solves the value function and estimates the structural parameters simultaneously. Thus, the computational burden of a dynamic problem is reduced by an order of magnitude with computational costs similar to a static model. The other is that the method reduces the curse of dimensionality by allowing state space grid points to vary between estimation iterations.
Given the massive size of our data set, a traditional MCMC estimation may take a prohibitively long time, because most methods must perform O( N) operations for N data points. A natural way to reduce the computation time is to run the chain in parallel. Past methods of parallel MCMC duplicate the data on multiple machines and cannot reduce the time of burnin. We instead use a new technique developed by Neiswanger et al. (2014) (hereafter, NWX) to address this problem. The key idea of this algorithm is that the data can be distributed into multiple machines, and the IJC estimation can be performed in parallel. Once we obtain the posterior Markov Chains from each machine,

we can algorithmically combine these individual chains to obtain the posterior chain of the whole sample.

5.4.1. Modified IJC Algorithm. Our model involves

a continuous choice variable, spending. Therefore, we modify the IJC algorithm40 to obtain the choice proba-

bility through kernel density estimation. We provide

a sketch of our estimation procedure and refer the reader

to Online Appendix A3 for more details. The whole

parameter space is divided into two sets ( {1, 2}), where the first one contains the set of hyperparameters

(1 {µ, µ, µ, µ, µ, µ, , , , , , }), and the

second set contains the set of heterogeneous param-

eters (2 {i, i, i, i, i, i}Ii 1). We allow all the heterogeneous parameters (represented by i) to

follow a normal distribution with mean µ and standard

deviation  for the parameters. Let the observed choices be Od {Odi }Ii 1 {Cdi , Qdi , Wid}, where Cdi  {Cdit,  t},

Qdi  {Qdit,  t}, and Wid  {Widt,  t}.

Each MCMC iteration consists of two blocks:

1. r ~

Draw f ( |

r1 µr,

; that is, draw r2-1)(  {, ,

µr ~ , ,

fµ(|r-1, , }, the

r2-1) and parame-

ters that capture the distribution of  for the pop-

ulation), where fµ and f are the conditional posterior

distributions.

2. Draw fi(i|Odi , r1

r2; ) by

that is, draw individual the Metropolis­Hastings

parameters i ~ (MH) algorithm.

5.4.2. Parallel Computing Following Neiswanger et al.
(2014). We adopt the parallel computing algorithm by Neiswanger et al. (2014) to estimate our model with data for more than 500,000 consumers. The logic behind this algorithm is that the full likelihood function is the product of the individual likelihoods:
N
p(|xN) } p()p(xN |) p()  p(xi|).
i1
Therefore, we can partition the data onto multiple machines and then perform MCMC sampling on each machine by using only the subset of data on that machine (in parallel, without any communication). Finally, we can combine the subposterior samples to algorithmically construct samples from the full-data posterior.
Our procedure is outlined below (for additional details, see Online Appendix A4):
1. Partition data xN into M subsets {xn1 , ..., xnM }. 2. For m 1, ... , M (in parallel), sample from the subposterior pm, where pm(|xnm ) } p()M1 p(xnm |). 3. Combine the subposterior samples to produce samples from an estimate of the subposterior density product p1 . . . pM, which is proportional to the full-data posterior, that is, p1 . . .pM() } p(|xN).

872

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

Given T samples {t}Tt 1 from a subposterior pm, we can write the kernel density estimator as pm().

pm()

1 T

T t1

1 hd K

|| - t|| h

1 T

T

(2

h2

)-

d 2

|Id

|

-

1 2

t1

exp - 21h2( - t)'Id-1( - t)

1 T

T
N(|t, h2Id),
t1

where we have used a Gaussian kernel with bandwidth parameter h, and where d is the dimensionality. After we have obtained the kernel density estimator pm() for M subposteriors, we define our nonparametric density product estimator for the full posterior as

p1 pm()

p1 pm()

1 TM

T

T



t1 1 tM

M
 N(|mtm , h2Id)
1m 1

T

T

} N

t1 1 tM 1

|

t

·

,

h2 M

Id

M
 N(mtm |t ·, h2Id)
m1

T

T

 wt

t1 1 tM 1



N

|

t

·,

h2 M

Id

.

This estimate is the probability density function of a mixture of TM Gaussians with unnormalized mixture
weights wt · Here, we use t · {t1, . . ., tM} to denote the set of indices for the M samples {1t1 , . . . , MtM} (each from one machine) associated with a given mixture compo-
nent, and we let

M
wt ·  N(mtm |t ·, h2Id),
m1

t ·

1 M

M
mtm .
m1

Given the hierarchical Bayes framework, after the posterior distribution of the population parameter is obtained, we use the MH algorithm once more to obtain the individual parameters (see the details in Online Appendix A3, Step 4).

6. Results
6.1. Model Comparison We compare our model against four other benchmark models to investigate the contribution of each element of the structural model. Models A, B, and C are special cases of our proposed model without forward looking, inattention, and unobserved heterogeneity, respectively. Model D is our proposed model. Table 9 shows the log-marginal density (Kass and Raftery 1995) and the hit rate for incidents of overdrafting, balance checking, and account closing. (We only compare these events because nonincidents are so prevalent. The hit rates for nonincidents are given in Online Appendix A5.) All four measures show that our proposed model significantly outperforms the benchmark models. Notably, inattention contributes the most to the model fit, which is consistent with our conjecture in Section 3.2.
6.2. Computational Gains from the Parallel IJC Method
We report the computational performance of different estimation methods in Table 10.
All the experiments were conducted on a server with a quad-core Intel E7-8860v3 processor (64 cores) and 1 TB RAM. The first column shows the performance of our proposed method, the IJC method with the parallel computing technique developed by Neiswanger et al. (2014). We compare this method with the traditional parallel computing method M-IJC (Murray 2010), the original IJC method, the conditional choice probability method by Arcidiacono and Miller (2011),41 and the full information maximum likelihood (FIML) method by Rust (1987) (or nested fixed point algorithm).42 As the sample size increases, the comparative advantage of our proposed method is more notable. Running the model on the full data set with more than 500,000 accounts takes approximately 1.5 hours, whereas running the original IJC method takes nine days.43 Our method takes less time because it takes advantage of multiple cores that run in parallel, whereas the other algorithms have not been designed to run in parallel and use only one core. The NWX-IJC method is also nearly four times faster than the traditional parallel computing method (Murray 2010) because the traditional parallel computing method is running on the entire data set. Once all the chains converge, we can pick samples from all the chains instead

Table 10. Estimation Time Comparison

Size\method (seconds)
1,000 10,000 100,000 >500,000

NWX-IJC
569 3,317 4,106 5,344 1.5 hours

M-IJC
1,150 10,105 15,971 20,720 5.8 hours

IJC
1,602 13,086 161,648 835,774 10 days

Parallel FIML
665 4,905 17,339 33,293 9.2 hours

FIML
5,911 59,662 719,181 3,583,565 41 days

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

873

Table 11. Monte Carlo Results When N = 100,000

Variable µ µ µ µ µ µ µ       

True value 0.9 0.5 5 5 8 20 0.01 0.1 0.2 0.1 1 1 2 0.005

Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation Mean Standard deviation

NWX-IJC
0.838 0.042 0.513 0.135 4.809 0.581 5.212 0.054 8.179 0.075 19.522 0.275 0.007 0.003 0.110 0.016 0.217 0.033 0.114 0.058 1.112 0.028 1.255 0.066 1.798 0.079 0.0056 0.0005

M-IJC
0.839 0.038 0.506 0.128 4.903 0.179 5.141 0.047 7.953 0.070 19.563 0.227 0.006 0.004 0.106 0.016 0.217 0.033 0.086 0.053 1.084 0.027 1.190 0.057 2.157 0.077 0.0053 0.0005

IJC
0.846 0.038 0.509 0.129 5.057 0.044 5.094 0.048 8.152 0.069 19.765 0.211 0.008 0.003 0.097 0.017 0.211 0.029 0.087 0.033 1.099 0.025 1.166 0.057 2.186 0.070 0.0053 0.0004

FIML
0.929 0.028 0.498 0.106 5.002 0.049 5.075 0.025 8.005 0.013 20.788 0.104 0.009 0.002 0.110 0.013 0.218 0.026 0.087 0.028 1.081 0.016 1.117 0.045 1.950 0.040 0.0052 0.0004

of a single chain to speed up sampling. However, the speedup occurs only after convergence. The time of burnin cannot be reduced. Instead, the NWX parallel computing method runs only on a subset of the data on each machine. So, the burn-in time can also be saved (in addition to the speedup after convergence). The NWX-IJC method is almost 600 times faster than the FIML method. This is because the full solution FIML method solves the

dynamic programming problem at each candidate value for the parameter estimates, whereas this IJC estimator only evaluates the value function once for each iteration.
We further run a simulation study to determine whether the various methods are able to accurately estimate all parameters. Table 11 shows that the different methods produce quite similar estimates and that all the mean parameter estimates are within two standard

Table 12. Structural Model Estimation Results

Variable i i i i i i i

Interpretation Discount factor Standard deviation of relative risk aversion Monitoring cost Inattention dynamics--lapsed time Dissatisfaction sensitivity Mean value of outside option Forced closure probability

Mean (µ)
0.9997 (0.00005) 0.258 (0.017) 4.613 (0.085) 7.861 (0.335) 5.626 (1.362) 18.793 (1.734) 0.012 (0.005)

Standard deviation ()
0.365 (0.063) 0.029 (0.006) 0.260 (0.045) 0.650 (0.106) 1.291 (0.120) 2.408 (0.829) 0.023 (0.009)

Notes. As a robustness check, we also ran the model using only the sample of consumers without a credit card or savings account. Please find the result in Online Appendix A10. Standard errors of the estimates are in parentheses.

874

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

errors of the true values. The parallel IJC method is slightly less accurate than the original IJC method.
6.3. Parameter Estimates Table 12 presents the results of the structural model.
We find that the daily discount factor is approximately 0.9997. This is equivalent to a yearly discount factor of 0.89, which is largely consistent with the literature (Hartmann and Nair 2010, Fang and Wang 2015). The standard deviation of the discount factor is 0.363. This suggests that some consumers have quite low discount factors--consistent with our heavy discounting hypothesis. The monitoring cost is estimated to be 4.605. Using the coefficient of risk aversion, we can evaluate the monitoring cost in monetary terms to be $2. In other words, consumers behave as if checking their balance costs them $2. (We can also obtain the cost measure for each individual consumer.)
The variance of the balance perception error increases with the time elapsed since the last balance check and with the mean balance level. Notably, the variance in the balance perception error is quite large. If we take the average number of days to check the balance from the data, which is 9, then the standard deviation is 7.860 × 9 = 70.74. This suggests that the balance perception error has a diffuse distribution.
The estimated dissatisfaction sensitivity parameters confirm our hypothesis that consumers can be strongly affected by overdraft fees and close their accounts because of dissatisfaction. If we consider an average overdraft transaction amount of $33, then the relative magnitude of the effect of dissatisfaction is comparable to $171. This suggests that unless the bank would like to offer $171 in compensation to consumers, dissatisfied consumers will close their current accounts and choose the outside option. Moreover, consistent with our exploratory data analysis (Figure 5), the dissatisfaction

sensitivity is stronger for light overdrafters (whose average is 5.911) than for heavy overdrafters (whose average is 3.387). Keeping the average overdraft transaction amount fixed, a 1% increase in the overdraft fee can increase the closing probability by 0.12%.
6.4. Smaller Sample Sizes This large data set used in the analysis is necessary for several reasons. First, compared with numerous other types of transactions, overdrafts are relatively rare events. Without a large amount of data, we cannot detect these rare but detrimental events, let alone understand and predict their diverse causes. Second, as shown in Section 3 of this paper, we find that consumers exhibit substantial heterogeneity in their spending behavior, cause of overdraft, monitoring cost, and dissatisfaction sensitivity. Because consumer heterogeneity is highdimensional, the big data allow us to capture this rich consumer heterogeneity in a much more refined fashion. Third, a selected subset might suffer from sampling error or sample bias. Because consumer behaviors and characteristics are high-dimensional, it is difficult to collect an accurate, random and representative sample. To illustrate the potential sampling error, we present the estimated parameters for randomly selected samples of 1,000 (Table 13) and 50,000 (Table 14) consumers.
The comparison indicates that without the full sample, the majority of the coefficients will become statistically insignificant, and heterogeneity will been underestimated by to very large extent.
7. Counterfactual Studies
7.1. Alternative Pricing Strategies Our structural model allows us to examine counterfactual studies that consider the effect of changing the pricing structure on consumers' spending patterns and, more importantly, their overdrafting behavior. We

Table 13. Structural Model Estimation Results When N = 1,000

Variable i i i i i i i

Interpretation Discount factor Standard deviation of relative risk aversion Monitoring cost Inattention dynamics--lapsed time Dissatisfaction sensitivity Mean value of outside option Forced closure probability

Note. Standard errors of the estimates are in parentheses.

Mean (µ)
0.9991 (0.028) 0.170 (0.258) 2.335 (1.973) 3.621 (4.845) 3.808 (17.991) 9.833 (21.882) 0.017 (0.089)

Standard deviation ()
0.158 (0.571) 0.029 (0.166) 0.268 (0.906) 0.470 (2.000) 1.163 (1.894) 2.009 (9.123) 0.022 (0.379)

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

875

Table 14. Structural Model Estimation Results When N = 50,000

Variable i i i i i i i

Interpretation Discount factor Standard deviation of relative risk aversion Monitoring cost Inattention dynamics--lapsed time Dissatisfaction sensitivity Mean value of outside option Forced closure probability

Note. Standard errors of the estimates are in parentheses.

Mean (µ)
0.9996 (0.0003) 0.205 (0.043) 3.887 (0.298) 6.351 (1.354) 5.893 (4.092) 12.566 (6.034) 0.009 (0.019)

Standard deviation ()
0.296 (0.202) 0.033 (0.021) 0.248 (0.123) 0.473 (0.290) 1.096 (0.377) 2.821 (2.665) 0.027 (0.061)

test the effect of three alternative pricing schemes, namely, a reduced per-item flat fee, a percentage fee, and a quantity premium. We provide the results in Table 15. We make two assumptions for all these simulations. One is fungibility, that is, a consumer's reaction depends only on the fee amount rather than the fee structure. If two different fee structures result in the same fee amount, then consumers should respond in the same fashion. The other is the universal dissatisfaction effect. We assume that consumers' dissatisfaction effect is proportional to the ratio of the overdraft fee to the transaction amount, despite the fee structure. It is possible that consumers will be less dissatisfied with alternative pricing schemes, such as a percentage fee, because they may be perceived as more fair (Bolton et al. 2003). However, we argue that rational consumers discover the commonality between different pricing strategies and react to only the essential factor (implicit price) that triggers dissatisfaction.
In the first scenario, we keep the per-item flat fee scheme but reduce it to $29.27 per item. Consistent with the law of demand, there is a negative relationship between the per-item overdraft fee and the overdraft frequency. Our choice of $29.27 is the solution of the optimal per-item fee to maximize the sum of the expected profit.
Expected profit is revenue minus cost. Revenue is the sum of revenue across our entire sample for a one-year period, and it includes overdraft fees and consumers' lifetime value.44 For convenience, we define this sum as the total revenue. Because we aggregate data to the daily level, we calculate the average transaction amount for each item, which is $44, and we use it to derive the total overdraft fee amount. For example, if a consumer overspent by $170, then the consumer would incur four overdraft item fees. Cost is defined as the default cost, which is the negative balances owed by consumers who defaulted. We ignore other costs, like the labor costs to

handle consumer complaints, costs for the customer service team to waive fees for some transactions, and so forth, because they are relatively small compared with the default cost and hard to measure. The profit calculation is a nested algorithm that searches for the peritem overdraft fee in the outer loop, and that solves the consumer's best response in terms of optimal spending, balance checking, and account closing, given the fee size in the inner loop. We found that the optimal peritem overdraft fee is $29.27, which would increase the bank's revenue by 2.35%. This suggests that the current overdraft fee is too high, because the bank fails to take into account consumers' negative reactions to overdraft fees, which results in a huge loss in consumers' lifetime value. In other words, at the original per-transaction price, demand is in the elastic region. Reducing it could increase the total revenue. Notice that for nonoverdrafters, the account closing frequency increases because some of them start paying overdraft fees and, hence, become dissatisfied. Therefore, the interest revenue decreases under the reduced flat fee.
In the second scenario, the per-item flat fee is converted into a percentage fee of 15.8% (solved in a similar way as described in the first scenario). This is lower than the 17% calculated from the ratio of the total fee paid to the total transaction amount that caused the fee in the data. Again, this suggests that the bank's current overdraft fees might be too high. Intuitively, the percentage structure should encourage consumers to overdraw on transactions with small amounts but deter them from overdrawing on transactions with large amounts. Because there are more transactions with small amounts than transactions with large amounts, the total revenue generated soars by 3.11%. Therefore, the percentage overdraft fee invites more consumers to use the overdraft service. It is this market expansion effect that increases the bank's overdraft revenue. At the segment level, the

876

Table 15. Welfare Analysis Under Alternative Pricing

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

Segment Nonoverdrafter
Light overdrafter
Heavy overdraftera

Behavior
Overdraft frequency Overdraft revenue Overdraft frequency Overdraft revenue Interest Interest Total revenue Default cost Profit Profit Balance-checking frequency Voluntary closure frequency Forced closure frequency Overdraft frequency Overdraft revenue Overdraft frequency Overdraft revenue Interest Interest Total revenue Default cost Profit Profit Balance-checking frequency Voluntary closure frequency Forced closure frequency Overdraft frequency Overdraft revenue Overdraft frequency Overdraft revenue Interest Interest Total revenue Default cost Profit Profit Balance-checking frequency Voluntary closure frequency Forced closure frequency

Current ($31)
-- --
6,093,611
6,093,611 0
6,093,611
62.3 7.87% 0.00% 181,113 5,316,813
153,601
5,470,413 387,265 5,083,148
56.2 5.30% 52.58% 568,439 16,917,234
24,213
16,941,448 5,987,641 10,953,807
58.4 4.00% 86.34%

Reduced flat ($29.27)
705 19,020 0.09% 0.09% 6,092,275 -0.02% 6,111,295 3.60 6,111,291 0.29% 60.3 7.83% 0.01% 195,668 5,440,829 8.04% 2.33% 154,097 0.32% 5,594,926 387,487 5,207,439 2.45% 51.5 4.99% 48.70% 620,116 17,442,921 9.09% 3.11% 24,233 0.08% 17,467,154 6,064,481 11,402,674 4.10% 58.4 3.92% 80.16%

Percentage (15.80%)
35,231 358,830 4.71% 1.62% 6,090,978 -0.04% 6,449,808 179.68 6,449,629 5.84%
55.3 7.85% 0.01% 575,163 6,113,207 217.57% 14.98% 155,888 1.16% 6,269,095 592,550 5,676,545 11.67% 51.3 3.90% 25.33% 314,149 16,643,035 -44.73% -1.62% 24,094 -0.49% 16,667,129 3,479,250 13,187,879 15.66% 58.3 4.46% 90.78%

Quantity premium (8.5% × I (OD  10) +
$31 × I (OD > 10))
56,350 308,795 7.52% 1.39% 6,091,632 -0.03% 6,400,427 287.39 6,400,140 5.03%
51.1 7.81% 0.01% 1,069,159 6,253,353 490.33% 17.61% 159,431 2.27% 6,412,784 540,890 5,871,894 15.52% 50.7 1.72% 12.44% 579,824 17,255,576 2.00% 2.00% 24,219 0.02% 17,279,795 6,136,567 11,143,228 -15.50% 58.4 4.04% 86.75%

Fixed bills ($31)
0 0 0.00% 0.00% 8,297,670 36.17% 8,297,670 0.00 8,297,670 36.17% 19.3 3.86% 0.00% 131,307 4,070,515 -27.50% -23.44% 158,084 2.92% 4,228,599 233,457 3,995,142 -21.40% 40.4 4.37% 43.72% 344,474 10,445,900 -39.40% -38.25% 24,274 0.25% 10,470,173 2,191,227 8,278,946 -24.64% 31.6 2.18% 52.14%

Waive high balance (0% × I (OD  1) + $31 × I (OD > 1))
0 0 0.00% 0.00% 6,520,164 7.00% 6,520,164 0.00 6,520,164 7.00% 53.7 7.02% 0.00% 167,530 4,918,052 -7.50% -7.50% 197,684 28.70% 5,115,737 331,354 4,784,382 -5.88% 52.0 2.80% 48.64% 566,165 16,849,565 -0.40% -0.40% 28,700 18.53% 16,878,265 5,892,546 10,985,719 -1.41% 57.1 3.96% 85.31%

Waive all (0% × I (OD  1) + $31 × I (OD > 1))
0 0 0.00% 0.00% 6,520,164 7.00% 6,520,164 0.00 6,520,164 7.00% 53.7 7.02% 0.00% 143,804 4,221,550 -20.60% -20.60% 203,675 32.60% 4,425,224 244,146 4,181,078 -17.75% 50.3 2.54% 41.75% 527,511 15,699,193 -7.20% -7.20% 32,114 32.63% 15,731,308 5,487,669 10,243,638 23.73% 52.4 3.76% 85.27%

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

Table 15. (Continued)

Segment

Behavior

Reduced flat

Current ($31)

($29.27)

Percentage (15.80%)

Quantity premium (8.5% × I (OD  10) +
$31 × I (OD > 10))

Fixed bills ($31)

Waive high balance (0% × I (OD  1) + $31 × I (OD > 1))

Waive all (0% × I (OD  1) + $31 × I (OD > 1))

Total

Overdraft frequency Overdraft revenue Overdraft freq Overdraft revenue Interest Interest Total revenue Default cost Profit Profit $ Profit %  Consumer surplus $  Consumer surplus %  Total surplus Balance-checking frequency Voluntary closure frequency Forced closure frequency

749,551 22,234,047
6,271,426 28,505,473 6,374,906 22,130,566
5,050,668,331 5,072,798,896
7.41% 9.61%

816,489 22,902,771
8.93% 3.01% 6,270,605 -0.01% 29,173,376 6,451,971 22,721,405 590,839 2.67% 1,166,431 0.02% 0.035% -3.65% -0.99% -7.22%

924,543 23,115,073
23.35% 3.96% 6,270,960 -0.01% 29,386,033 4,071,980 25,314,053 3,183,487 14.39% 1,337,297 0.03% 0.089% -10.55% -2.24% -31.89%

1,705,333 23,817,725 127.51%
7.12% 6,275,282
0.06% 30,093,007 6,677,745 23,415,261 1,284,696
5.81% 515,681 0.01% 0.035% -16.42% -6.41% -49.49%

475,781 14,516,414 -36.52% -34.71% 8,480,028
35.22% 22,996,442 2,424,684 20,571,759 -1,558,807
-7.04% 3,055,197
0.06% 0.029% -63.69% 48.03% -24.78%

733,695 21,767,617
-2.12% -2.10% 6,746,548 7.58% 28,514,165 6,223,900 22,290,265 159,699 0.72% 1,532,084 0.03% 0.033% -12.68% -13.69% -5.30%

671,315 19,920,743 -10.44% -10.40% 6,755,953
7.73% 26,676,696 5,731,815 20,944,880 -1,185,685
-5.36% 1,937,923
0.04% 0.015% -13.31% 14.22% -13.86%

aThe membership of nonoverdrafters (who do not overdraw during the 15-month sample period), light overdrafters (whose overdraft frequencies are not in the top 20 percentile), and heavy overdrafters (whose overdraft frequencies are in the top 20 percentile of all overdrafters) are based on the observed data instead of the counterfactuals.

877

878

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

overdraft frequency for nonoverdrafters and light overdrafters increases, whereas the overdraft frequency for heavy overdrafters decreases. This is because nonoverdrafters and light overdrafters are mainly overdrawing with transactions of small amounts, which benefit from a lower cost under the percentage fee. In contrast, heavy overdrafters suffer from a higher fee because they overdraw primarily with large transaction amounts.
In the last scenario, a quantity premium structure is employed. Specifically, when a consumer overdraws fewer than 10 times, the consumer pays an 8.5% percentage fee, but once 10 overdrafts occur, each overdraft incurs a flat fee of $31. This quantity premium increases the bank's revenue by 5.59%. The motivation for this fee structure is to charge a quantity premium after seconddegree price discrimination in which we segment light and heavy overdrafters. The bank would earn more in overdraft fees from the heavy overdrafters, who are willing to pay for the flat fee, but retain the lifetime value for the light overdrafters, who prefer the percentage fee (because of their high dissatisfaction sensitivity). Different from the percentage fee, under the quantity premium, the overdraft revenue from heavy overdrafters also increases because the fee is capped for them.
Interestingly, across the three strategies, the balancechecking frequency of heavy overdrafters remains largely unchanged. This is because they overdraw primarily because of heavy discounting rather than inattention due to their low monitoring cost. For nonoverdrafters and light overdrafters, the three new strategies all decrease their balance-checking frequency, because when their fees become lower, there is less incentive for them to check their balances. Furthermore, the reduced flat fee and percentage fee both lead to a drop of interest revenue, but the quantity premium leads to a rise in interest revenue because the light overdrafters are not likely to close their accounts under this pricing strategy. As to welfare effects, both the consumer surplus and the social surplus increase under all three strategies. The increase in consumer welfare comes from reduced fees as well as lower monitoring costs incurred by consumers.45
7.2. Fixed Bills
In our model, the income uncertainty primarily comes from the volatility of bills because their varied arrival dates and amounts. In fact, consumers can avoid these unnecessary uncertainties by fixing their bill arrival dates and amounts.46 In this counterfactual, we test how welfare is changes when all consumers have a fixed bill arrival date and the same amount in each pay period. The exact arrival date and bill amount is specific for each consumer based on the observed data. As you can see from Table 15, when we fix the bills, the overdraft frequency for all overdrafters decreases, as does their balance-checking frequency and account closure frequency. All of these measures boost consumer surplus

but reduce the bank's overdraft revenue. Total surplus rises because the gain to consumers outweighs the loss to the bank. From a public policy perspective, the government might enforce a policy to fix the bill arrival date and/or amount to help consumers with the overdraft problem.
7.3. Waiver In practice, some banks waive overdraft fees when consumers complain about them. The welfare impact of this strategy is not clear. On one hand, the waived overdraft fee is a direct cost for the bank. But on the other hand, consumer attrition might be lower and the bank could earn more customer lifetime value. To understand this trade-off, we test two counterfactual scenarios: where the bank waives the overdraft fee once a year for consumers with high balances (balances above the median) and for all its consumers. When the waiver is offered to only the high-worth consumers, we find that retention and profitability both increase, as does consumer welfare. The latter is because the waiver reduces the monitoring costs of high-balance consumers, as they no longer have to check their balances very frequently. This increases high-net-worth consumers' utility in remaining with the bank; hence, retention and profitability rise. In contrast, when the bank grants the waiver to all consumers instead of only the high-balance ones, the bank's profit declines owing to lower overdraft revenue. Nevertheless, the social surplus is higher with the waiver than without it. Therefore, although the bank might have an incentive to implement the waiver for high balance customers, from a policy perspective, the government might also consider implementing the waiver for all consumers.
8. Contributions and Limitations
The $32 billion in overdraft fees assessed by banks in 2012 has increased consumer attrition and drawn regulators' attention to this issue. However, there is little quantitative research on consumers' financial decisionmaking processes that explains their overdrafting behavior. The lack of well-calibrated models prevents financial institutions from designing appropriate pricing strategies and improving their financial products. With the aid of big data that capture consumers' spending patterns, banks can improve overdraft fees.
In this paper, we build a dynamic structural model of consumer daily spending that incorporates inattention to rationalize consumers' overdrafting behavior. We quantify the discount factor, monitoring cost, and dissatisfaction sensitivity for each consumer and use these variables to design new strategies. In comparing the current pricing scheme with several alternative pricing strategies, we find that a percentage fee structure can increase the studied bank's revenue through market expansion and that the quantity premium structure can increase the bank's revenue because of second-degree

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

879

price discrimination. New fee structures can also improve consumer welfare because of reduced monitoring costs.
We calibrated our model at an individual level on a sample of more than 500,000 accounts. The large sample is necessary because of overdraft being a rare event and the rich unobserved consumer heterogeneity. Besides, the sampling error can cause detrimental effect. To illustrate, we randomly select 10% of the sample and redo the analysis. The predicted revenue in the counterfactual of the quantity premium strategy is 6%, or $0.3 million less than the value obtained from results using the entire data set. In other words, the sampling error might lead to an incorrect strategy and a significant loss to the bank. Therefore, we argue that, given the sizable sampling error, if the computational burden of estimating a dynamic structural model on a large data set is minimal, as demonstrated by our parallel IJC algorithm, using the full data set is preferred.
To estimate a complicated structural model with big data, we adopt parallel computing techniques in combination with the Bayesian estimation algorithm developed by Imai et al. (2009). This new method significantly reduces the computation burden, and it could be used by other researchers and marketers who would like to use structural models to solve real-world large-scale problems. Although we apply it to the overdraft context, the model framework can be generalized to analyze other marketing problems in which consumers have similar dynamic budget allocation decisions (e.g., utility accounts and mobile phones).
Several limitations of the current study call for future work. First, we do not observe consumers' existing alert settings. Some consumers may have already received alerts to help them make financial decisions. This might cause an overestimation of the monitoring cost and an underestimation of the inattention sensitivity to lapsed time. But given the prevalence of overdrafts, we conjecture that many consumers are not using alerts. And because our counterfactual only alters the pricing strategies, we cannot think of any reason that our welfare analysis results can be different after accounting for alerts. Future studies might consider incorporating alert data or investigating counterfactual scenarios where alerts reduce monitoring costs. Second, we do not have data on consumers' decision to opt in for overdraft protection by ATM/POS transactions. We only know that if ATM/ POS transactions caused overdrafts, then the consumer must have opted in. However, if we do not observe ATM/POS-transaction-caused overdrafts, this does not mean that the consumer has opted out. Sometimes, an opt-in consumer can be cautious enough (low monitoring cost) to avoid overdrafts from using ATM/POS transactions. Had we known the opt-in status information, we could have provided an informative prior within our Bayesian model, as consumers who opt in probably have stronger needs for short-term liquidity owing to

fluctuations in the size and arrival time of their income and spending. Moreover, it is possible that consumers might forgive the bank after a period of time. Future research could examine whether consumer dissatisfaction declines over time. Finally, we model only consumers' nonpreauthorized spending from their checking accounts with one bank. In reality, consumers usually have multiple accounts, such as savings, credit cards,47 and loans, with multiple financial institutions. A model that captures consumers' decisions across all accounts for both short-term and long-term finances would provide a more complete picture of consumers' financial constraints, management capabilities, and resources so that the bank can design more customized products.
Endnotes
1 According to Evans et al. (2011), there are 180 million checking accounts in the United States. 2 Examples can be found in Consumers Union (2013) Sick of unfair overdraft fees? Tell us about it! (June 18), http://consumersunion .org/2013/06/rep-carolyn-maloney-pursues-consumer-protections-on -overdraft-fees/ and Hellman J (2014) Overdraft fee abuse. Aljazeera America (January 21), http://america.aljazeera.com/watch/shows/ real-money-with-alivelshi/Real-Money-Blog/2014/1/21/overdraft -fee-abuse.html. 3 See "Consumers and Congress Tackle Big Bank Fees," http://banking -law.lawyers.com/consumer-banking/consumers-and-congress-tackle -big-bank-fees.html. 4 See the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau study of overdraft programs at http://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/201306_cfpb_whitepaper _overdraft-practices.pdf. 5 For the sake of confidentiality, we cannot disclose the exact number, but it is a representative sample from the banks' customers and is within the range of 500,000 to 1,000,000 accounts. 6 All dollar values in the paper have been rescaled by a number between 0.85 and 1.15 to help obfuscate the exact amounts and preserve the anonymity of the customers, but this factor does not change the substantive implications. Using our rescaled values the bank sets the first-time overdraft fee for each consumer at $22, and all subsequent overdraft fees are set at $31. 7 The maximum number of per-item overdraft fees is between three and six. 8 The grace period, which is the number of days before the continuous overdraft fee applies is between 3 and 10. 9 See the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (http://www.federalreserve .gov/bankinforeg/caletters/Attachment_CA_13-17_Reg_E_Examination _Procedures.pdf). 10 See the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau study of overdraft programs at http://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/201306_cfpb_whitepaper _overdraft-practices.pdf. 11 See endnote 7. 12 We also considered hyperbolic discounting with two discount factors, a short-term present bias parameter and a long-term discount factor. With more than three periods of data within a pay period, hyperbolic discount factors can be identified (Fang and Silverman 2009). However, our estimation results show that the present bias parameter is not significantly different from 1. Therefore, we keep only one discount factor in the current model. Estimation results with hyperbolic discount factors are available upon request. 13 We separate the analyses for heavy overdrafters, light overdrafters, and nonoverdrafters because each segment shows distinct behavioral

880

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

patterns. The segment is defined by the number of overdraft occurrences in the sample period. 14 Another explanation of this phenomenon is that this consumer forgot the exact amount of balance. Our notion of inattention is consistent with forgetting (Mullainathan 2002, Mehta et al. 2004, Ching and Ishihara 2010). 15 We also find that light overdrafters are more likely to check balances after overdraft fees are charged than heavy overdrafters. This also provides evidence for inattention. Furthermore, we find that light overdrafters fail to learn from past experiences. Specifically, we find a positive correlation between the time elapsed since overdraft and the time gap between two balance-checking times. This suggests that immediately after overdrafting, consumers might start monitoring their checking accounts. As time goes by, however, they become inattentive again. 16 We also test this assumption by estimating a myopic model and a bounded forward-looking model. The results can be found in Online Appendix A6. 17 Our focal bank practices "nightly batch processing," a process of posting transactions (credits and debits) to the account after the close of business each day, following the industry standard. However, the posting order is based on the exact transaction time (to an accuracy of each second). Preauthorized transactions, like income deposits (direct deposit) or bill payments, are always posted before nonpreauthorized transactions. Our model timing is consistent with this posting order. Moreover, our model assumes that balance checking happens before spending. In the scenario when the consumer spends before checking his or her balance (our data will show that the debit transaction occurs before balance checking), we assume that the consumer does not know the initial balance of that day. 18 Consumption Cit must be nonnegative. When applied to the data, there are days when consumers just receive income (e.g., deposit money) without any consumption (spending). In this case, we set Cit = 0 but update the budget equation with the "negative spending" discussed in Section 4.5. 19 We discuss how we differentiate bills and consumption in the data in the last paragraph of Section 4.1. 20 This assumption is realistic in our setting because we distinguish between inattentive and attentive consumers. The argument that a consumer might not be fully aware of the per-item fee is indirectly captured by the balance perception error (which we explain in the next subsection) in the sense that the uncertain overdraft fee is equivalent to the uncertain balance because both of these tighten the consumer's budget constraint. As for attentive consumers who overdraw because of heavy discounting, such consumers would be fully aware of the potential costs of overdrafting. Thus, in both cases, we argue that the assumption of a known total overdraft fee is reasonable. 21 Alternatively, we could describe this nonpreauthorized spending as immediate or discretionary spending. We avoid the term discretionary spending to avoid confusion with the usual economic definition. Economists traditionally use the term discretionary as the amount of income left after spending on necessities such as food, clothing, and housing, whereas in our problem, we are thinking about immediate spending that could have been delayed. 22 We choose to assume that consumers are inattentive to balances instead of the overdraft fee for several reasons. First, the mean overdraft frequency is 10 times, and the median overdraft frequency is three times. This implies that most consumers have paid overdraft fees multiple times. According to the bank's policy, once a consumer overdraws, he or she will receive both an email and mail notification immediately, and the overdraft payment will be reflected in the account statement. During the sample period, the bank did not change its overdraft fee. Therefore, provided that a consumer overdrew once and paid the overdraft fee, he or she should be aware of the overdraft charge. Moreover, according to the Regulation E

amendment, after 2009, consumers must be informed of the

overdraft fee policy, including its amount, for the bank to obtain

affirmative consent (opt in) for overdraft coverage from consumers.

As our sample period falls after 2010, all consumers have been in-

formed of the overdraft charge. Finally, the model-free evidence in

Table 5 and Figure 3 suggests that balance-checking frequency sig-

nificantly affects overdraft probability. Therefore, uncertainty re-

garding balances appears to be a major driver of overdrafts.

23 Consumers can also be naively inattentive, but we do not allow for

this here. See the discussion in Grubb (2014).

24 Conditional on her consumption choices today, Cit, based on Equation (2), the consumer is still not perfectly informed about the

budget constraint at the beginning of the next period, that is, Bit+1, because the preauthorized bills, it+1, is unknown. 25 The mean balance perception error ¯ cannot be separately identified

from the variance parameters  because the identification sources

both come from consumers' overdraft fee payments. Specifically,

a high overdraft payment for a consumer can be explained by either

a positive balance perception error or a large perception error vari-

ance caused by a large . Thus, we fix ¯ at zero; that is, the perception

error is assumed to be unbiased.

26 We considered other specifications for the relationship between the

perception error variance and the time elapsed since the last balance

check. The results remained qualitatively unchanged.

27 We also tested whether the forced closure probability is associated

with the overdraft transaction amount, but we failed to find a sta-

tistically significant relationship.

28 When estimating this linear probability model, we set the lower

bound and upper bound of f at 0 and 1.

29 We also consider two other models with dissatisfaction specified as

the sum of past ratios it

ODit |Bit -Cit |

and allow consumers to forget the

ratios except the past three ones. However, both the log marginal

density and the hit rate of these alternative models are worse than our

proposed model.

30 Please find a discussion of the normalization in Online Appendix A7.

31 The correlation between the overdraft fee and the overdraft amount

is actually very small (0.02), so we assume that the overdraft fee is not

an increasing function of the overdraft amount but i.i.d. over time.

32 A compound Poisson distribution is the probability distribution of

the sum of a number of independent identically distributed random

variables, where the number of terms to be added is itself a Poisson-

distributed variable. In our model, each independent bill, for ex-

ample, a mortgage loan interest or credit card payment, is a random

variable. Because the total number of bills that arrive each day is

Poisson-distributed, the sum of the bills becomes a compound

Poisson distribution. We use G to characterize the discrete distri-

bution of the size of each individual bill, and G is an empirical

distribution. Suppose in the entire sample, that one consumer has

three utility bills with amounts $30, $50, and $80 as well as one cell

phone bill of the amount $30. Then, G is G(x)

0.5 if x 30, 0.25 if x 50, 0.25 if x 80.

The arrival rate parameter  in the Poisson distribution is estimated

using the maximum likelihood method. We estimate both G and 

from the data heterogeneously for each individual before estimating the

structural model. They are used as inputs in the structural estimation.

33 More explanations on our choice of the income and bill process can

be found in Online Appendix A9.

34 The transition process for the perceived balance Bit is jointly determined by Equations (2) and (4).

35 For the sake of simplicity, we have omitted the subscript i.

36 We also tried to fix the discount factor (at 0.9997) and estimate the

coefficients of risk aversion. The posterior mean of the estimated

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

881

coefficient of relative risk aversion is 0.72. Other structural parameter estimates are not significantly affected under this specification. Our results confirm that the coefficient of risk aversion and the discount factor are mathematically substitutes (Andersen et al. 2008). Estimation results with a fixed discount factor are available upon request. 37 We also tried other values for the coefficient of relative risk aversion . The estimated discount factor  values change when we use different values of , but other structural parameter values remain the same. The policy simulation results are also robust to the use of different values of . 38 Pr(Qit|Wit 1, Sit) . 39 These partial derivatives do not have the logit closed-form solution because of the specification for forced closure. 40 The IJC method is designed for dynamic discrete choice problems. Zhou (2012) also applied it to a continuous choice problem. 41 We use the finite mixture model to capture unobserved heterogeneity and apply the Expectation Maximization algorithm to solve for the unobserved heterogeneity. More details of the estimation results can be obtained upon request. 42 We use the random coefficient model to capture unobserved heterogeneity. More details of the estimation results can be obtained upon request. 43 We keep a total of 2,000 MCMC iterations and use the first 500 as burn-in. Convergence was assessed visually by using plots of the parameters. We chose a store of N=100 past pseudo­value functions. The bandwidth parameter is set to h 0.01. 44 We calculate the lifetime value of a consumer by multiplying the average balance and the interest rate, accounting for the life expectancy (closing the account). This is the source of the interbank interest rate (the U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Effective Federal Funds Rate (FEDFUNDS), accessed March 14, 2016, https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/FEDFUNDS). 45 A similar effect is documented by Chen and Yao (2016), where consumers incur lower search costs with refinement tools. 46 See Forbes T (2016) Change your payment due dates. Penny Pinchin Mom (January 18), https://www.pennypinchinmom.com/budget-tip -change-your-payment-due-dates/. 47 Credit card spending can be modeled as a random variable, distributed log normally with its variance depending on the average amount of the credit card bill by individual.
References
Andersen S, Harrison GW, Lau MI, Rutstro¨ m EE (2008) Eliciting risk and time preferences. Econometrica 76(3):583­618.
Arcidiacono P, Miller RA (2011) Conditional choice probability estimation of dynamic discrete choice models with unobserved heterogeneity. Econometrica 79(6):1823­1867.
Arrow KJ (1963) Liquidity preference. The Economics of Uncertainty, Lecture Notes for Economics, Vol. 285 (Stanford University, Stanford, CA), 33­53.
Bellman R (1957) Dynamic Programming (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Bolton RN (1998) A dynamic model of the duration of the customer's relationship with a continuous service provider: The role of satisfaction. Marketing Sci. 17(1):45­65.
Bolton LE, Warlop L, Alba JW (2003) Consumer perceptions of price (un)fairness. J. Consumer Res. 29(4):474­491.
Burns R (2010) Managing credit: 3 ways overdraft fees will still haunt you. Black Enterprise (August 9), http://www.blackenterprise .com/money/managing-credit-3-ways-overdraft-fees-will-still -haunt-you/
Chen Y, Yao S (2016) Sequential search with refinement: Model and application with click-stream data. Management Sci. 63(12):4345­4365.

Chetty R, Looney A, Kroft K (2009) Salience and taxation: Theory and evidence. Amer. Econom. Rev. 99(4):1145­1177.
Ching A, Ishihara M (2010) The effects of detailing on prescribing decisions under quality uncertainty. Quant. Marketing Econom. 8(2): 123­165.
Ching A, Erdem T, Keane M (2009) The price consideration model of brand choice. J. Appl. Econom. 24(3):393­420.
DellaVigna S (2009) Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field. J. Econom. Literature 47(2):315­372.
Evans D, Litan R, Schmalensee R (2011) Economic analysis of the effects of the Federal Reserve Board's proposed debit card interchange fee regulations on consumers and small businesses. Working paper, University of Chicago Law School, Chicago.
Fang H, Silverman D (2009) Time-inconsistency and welfare program participation: Evidence from the NLSY. Internat. Econom. Rev. 50(4):1043­1077.
Fang H, Wang Y (2015) Estimating dynamic discrete choice models with hyperbolic discounting, with an application to mammography decisions. Internat. Econom. Rev. 56(2):565­596.
Fiske ST, Taylor SE (1991) Social Cognition, 2nd ed. (McGraw-Hill, New York).
Friend I, Blume M (1975) The demand for risky assets. Amer. Econom. Rev. 65(5):900­922.
Gabaix X, Laibson D (2006) Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and information suppression in competitive markets. Quart. J. Econom. 121(2):505­540.
Gopalakrishnan A, Iyengar R, Meyer RJ (2014) Consumer dynamic usage allocation and learning under multipart tariffs. Marketing Sci. 34(1):116­133.
Grubb MD (2014) Consumer inattention and bill-shock regulation. Rev. Econom. Stud. 82(1):219­257.
Hall RE (1978) Stochastic implications of the life cycle-permanent income hypothesis: Theory and evidence. J. Political Econom. 86(6):971­987.
Hartmann WR, Nair HS (2010) Retail competition and the dynamics of demand for tied goods. Marketing Sci. 29(2):366­386.
Hirshleifer D, Teoh HS (2003) Herd behaviour and cascading in capital markets: A review and synthesis. Eur. Financial Management 9(1):25­66.
Imai S, Jain N, Ching A (2009) Bayesian estimation of dynamic discrete choice models. Econometrica 77(6):1865­1899.
Kass R, Raftery A (1995) Bayes factors. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 90(430): 773­795.
Keaveney SM (1995) Customer switching behavior in service industries: An exploratory study. J. Marketing 59(2):71­82.
Matzler K, Würtele A, Renzl B (2006) Dimensions of price satisfaction: A study in the retail banking industry. Internat. J. Bank Marketing 24(4):216­231.
Mehta N, Rajiv S, Srinivasan K (2004) Role of forgetting in memorybased choice decisions: A structural model. Quant. Marketing Econom. 2(2):107­140.
Merton R (1992) Continuous Time Finance (Blackwell Publishing, Cambridge, UK).
Modigliani F, Brumberg R (1954) Utility analysis and the consumption function: An interpretation of cross-section data. Kurihara KK, ed. Post Keynesian Economics (Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ), 388­436.
Monroe KB (1990) Pricing: Making Profitable Decisions (McGraw-Hill, New York).
Murray L (2010) Distributed Markov chain Monte Carlo. Working paper, CSIRO Mathematics, Perth, Australia.
Mullainathan S (2002) A memory-based model of bounded rationality. Quart. J. Econom. 117(3):735­774.
Neiswanger W, Wang C, Xing E (2014) Asymptotically exact, embarrassingly parallel MCMC. Proc. 30th Internat. Conf. Uncertainty Artificial Intelligence (AUAI, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada).

882

Liu, Montgomery, and Srinivasan: Analyzing Bank Overdraft Fees with Big Data Marketing Science, 2018, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 855­882, © 2018 INFORMS

Nwokoye NG (1975) Subjective judgments of price: The effects of price parameters on adaptation levels. Proc. Fall Conf. Amer. Marketing Assoc. (American Marketing Association, Chicago).
Peng L, Xiong W (2006) Investor attention, overconfidence and category learning. J. Financial Econom. 80(3):563­602.
Pope DG (2009) Reacting to rankings: Evidence from "America's Best Hospitals." J. Health Econom. 28(6):1154­1165.
Reis R (2006) Inattentive producers. Rev. Econom. Stud. 73(3):793­821. Rossi PE Allenby GM, McCulloch RE (2005) Bayesian Statistics and
Marketing ( John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ). Rust J (1987) Optimal replacement of GMC bus engines: An empirical
model of Harold Zurcher. Econometrica 55(5):999­1033. Sims CA (1998) Stickiness. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, Vol. 49 (North Holland, Amsterdam), 317­356. Sims CA (2003) Implications of rational inattention. J. Monetary
Econom. 50(3):665­690.

Stango V, Zinman J (2014) Limited and varying consumer attention evidence from shocks to the salience of bank overdraft fees. Rev. Financial Stud. 27(4):990­1030.
Sudhir K (2016) Editorial--The exploration-exploitation tradeoff and efficiency in knowledge production. Marketing Sci. 35(1):1­9.
Topper S (2012) The history and evolution of the free checking account. Free Checking Information (March 18), http:// freecheckinginformation.com/financial-writers/the-history-and -evolution-of-the-free-checking-account/
Tversky A, Kahneman D (1973) Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probable cause. Cognitive Psych. 5(September):207­232.
Yao S, Mela CF, Chiang J, Chen Y (2012) Determining consumers' discount rates with field studies. J. Marketing Res. 49(6):822­841.
Zhou Y (2012) Failure to launch in two-sided markets: A study of the US video game market. Working paper, State University of New York, Stony Brook.

