http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/mksc/

MARKETING SCIENCE
Vol. 36, No. 1, January­February 2017, pp. 124­139 ISSN 0732-2399 (print), ISSN 1526-548X (online)

Product Line Bundling: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End

Steven M. Shugan,a Jihwan Moon,a Qiaoni Shi,a Nanda S. Kumar b
a Warrington College of Business, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611; b School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas 75083 Contact: sms@ufl.edu (SMS); mjhxnna@ufl.edu (JM); qiaonishi@ufl.edu (QS); nkumar@utdallas.edu (NSK)

Received: May 23, 2014 Accepted: June 3, 2016 Published Online in Articles in Advance: December 2, 2016
https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2016.1004
Copyright: © 2017 INFORMS

Abstract. Product lines are ubiquitous. For example, Marriott International manages high-end ultra-luxury hotels (e.g., Ritz-Carlton) and low-end economy hotels (e.g., Fairfield Inn). Firms often bundle core products with ancillary services (or add-ons). Interestingly, empirical observations reveal that industries with ostensibly similar characteristics (e.g., customer types, costs, competition, distribution channels, etc.) employ different bundling strategies. For example, airlines bundle high-end first class with ancillary services (e.g., breakfast, entertainment) while hotel chains bundle ancillary services (e.g., breakfast, entertainment) at the low-end. We observe, unlike hotel lines that are highly differentiated at different geographic locations, airlines suffer low core differentiation because all passengers (first-class and economy) are at the same location (i.e., same plane, weather, delays, cancellations, etc.). In general, we find product lines with low core differentiation (e.g., airlines, amusement parks) routinely bundle high-end while product lines with highly differentiated cores (e.g., hotels, restaurants) routinely bundle low-end. High-end bundling makes the high-end more attractive, increasing line differentiation (less intraline competition) while low-end bundling decreases line differentiation. Therefore, bundling allows optimal differentiation given a differentiation constraint (complex costs). Last, firms may use strategic bundling for targeting in their core products; e.g., low-end hotels bundle targeted add-ons unattractive to high-end consumers such as lower-quality breakfasts and slower Internet.

History: Preyas Desai served as the editor-in-chief and Anne Coughlan served as associate editor for this article.
Supplemental Material: Data and the online appendix are available at https://doi.org/10.1287/ mksc.2016.1004.
Keywords: product line · strategic bundling · analytic model · pricing · targeted add-ons · ancillary services · fees

1. Introduction
1.1. An Empirical Paradox Shugan and Kumar (2012, 2014) present some empirical observations, which we verify, that reveal a small but interesting paradox. Service providers often sell a line of core services at different quality levels (Bitner et al. 1990). For example, Marriott International, like other hotel chains, offers a line of hotels that vary in quality including the super-luxury Ritz-Carlton, the high-end Renaissance, the mid-range Courtyard, and the economy-oriented Fairfield Inn and Suites (see Figure 1). In addition to core lodging services, Marriott offers a huge array of ancillary services, for example, breakfasts, Internet, irons, parking, premium entertainment, etc. Similarly, Delta Air Lines, like other airlines, has different core services that vary in quality including Delta One (First Class), Delta Comfort+, Main Cabin, and Basic Economy while providing many ancillary services (see Figure 2). Examples of product lines with ancillary products are ubiquitous in many industries: air transportation, financial services,

cruises, retailing, packaged goods, live events, lodging, shipping, touring, etc.
A core service is often bundled with ancillary products (Wittmer et al. 2012). Interestingly, our empirical observations demonstrate that bundling often appears at different ends in a product line, i.e., some industries tend to bundle high-end while other industries bundle low-end. For example, the live event (e.g., concerts) industry tends to bundle high-end tickets with ancillary products (e.g., photographs, commemorative laminates, merchandise, hosting, backstage tours) while restaurants tend to bundle ancillary products (e.g., dinner salads, sides, desserts) at the low-end of their lines. Moreover, airlines often bundle high-end (see Table 1) while hotels often bundle low-end (see Figure 3). For example, the first-class airline service bundles meals, headphones, luggage handling, reservation assistance, seat selection, premium movies, alcoholic drinks, and priority security queues, while basic economy coach service usually does not (Carey 2011). By contrast, hotel chains that serve similar travelers often bundle

124

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

125

Figure 1. Marriott International Product Line
4HE2ITZ#ARLTON!WORLDWIDESYMBOLFORTHEFINESTIN ACCOMMODATIONSANDSERVICE
"ULGARI(OTELS2ESORTS,EADINGLUXURYHOSPITALITY COLLECTIONINTHEWORLD-ARRIOTTMANAGED
*7-ARRIOTT%LEGANTANDLUXURIOUSBRANDLITTLETOUCHES ADDUPTOEXCEPTIONALEXPERIENCES
2ENAISSANCE(OTELS%ACHOFFERSITSOWNPERSONALITY LOCALFLAVORDISTINCTIVESTYLEANDCHARM
-ARRIOTT(OTELS2ESORTS0ROVIDESCONSISTENT DEPENDABLEANDGENUINECARINGEXPERIENCESTOGUESTS ONTHEIRTERMS
#OURTYARDBY-ARRIOTT4HEQUALITYYOULOVEINCONVENIENT LOCATIONSTHROUGHOUTTHEWORLD
3PRING(ILL3UITESBY-ARRIOTT3PACIOUSFLOORPLANSDEDICATED WORKSPACESATAPRICEYOULLLOVE
&AIRFIELD)NN3UITESBY-ARRIOTT0ROVIDESEVERYTHING YOUNEEDTOWORKPRODUCTIVELY
Notes. Logos are only intended to identify Marriott products. Their use does not reflect sponsorship or association of this article with Marriott Corporation.

ancillary services including parking and breakfast at low-end hotels. There are over 700 (low-end) Marriott Fairfield hotels and all bundle Wi-Fi regardless of (local) competition. In many other industries, ancillary products are bundled at either low-end or high-end (see Table 2).
Although airlines and hotels use different bundling strategies, both industries serve the same markets (i.e., leisure and business travelers) and face similar competitive market structures. Moreover, airlines and hotels have similar cost structures (i.e., high fixed costs and low variable costs). Finally, airlines and hotels use similar (often the same) distribution channels (e.g., online reservations), employ similar advertising, and face similar local add-on tax structures. Hence, it is difficult to explain why airlines and hotels employ different bundling strategies because those two industries are very similar in almost every respect. This paper
Figure 2. Delta Air Lines Product Line

provides an explanation for this possibly surprising empirical paradox and discusses important implications for product-line management with bundling.
Two types of "differentiation constraints" may help explain this empirical conundrum. First, firms cannot often achieve sufficient line differentiation only with the cores. For example, cruises offer different classes of accommodations (like hotels). However, without ancillary products, cruises find it difficult to differentiate their high-end services because passengers on the same cruise (like airlines) experience the same departure (arrival) time, staff, ship facilities, security, scenery, etc. Given this "high-end" differentiation constraint, it may not be profitable to develop a product line. In general, firms suffer similar differentiation constraints when services in the same line are constrained to a particular space (e.g., amusement parks, trains, concerts, etc.). This small core differentiation leads firms to

$ELTA/NE FIRSTCLASS

$ELTA#OMFORT
-AINCABIN BASICECONOMY

.OADVANCESEAT SELECTION
NOCHANGES

126

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

Table 1. Airlines Unbundle Low-End and Bundle High-end (Delta Air Lines)

Ancillary services

Economy-class (low-end) First-class (high-end)

Checked baggage
Flight change Same-day flight

First checked bag Second checked bag
Change your flight
Same-day confirmed Standby fee

$25 $35
$200
$50--Based on fare rules $50

In-flight entertainment

Snacks

$3­$5

Meals on designated flights

$6­$10

Alcoholic beverages

$5­$7

Headsets

$2

TV episodes

$1 for a TV episode

HBO

$1 for an HBO episode

Movies

$6 for a movie/TV bundle

Complimentary Complimentary
Complimentary
Complimentary Complimentary
Complimentary Complimentary Complimentary Complimentary Complimentary Complimentary Complimentary

Note. Fees reported in this table are based on flights less than 250 miles within the United States and Canada.

bundle high-end to achieve optimal line differentiation. Second, firms can suffer from suboptimal low-end
quality, i.e., a "low-end" differentiation constraint. For example, high-end hotels (e.g., Hyatt's Park Resorts, Marriott's Ritz-Carlton) can achieve optimal high-end quality at locations high-income travelers prefer, but low-end hotels (e.g., Hyatt's Place hotel, Marriott's Fairfield hotel) may be constrained by less desirable (lower rent) locations and lower core quality (e.g., less expensive systems and staff), i.e., the location and technology limit low-end quality. For instance, the lower-end Courtyard Waikiki Beach Hotel is a 12-minute walk from Waikiki Beach, while the

higher-end Waikiki Beach Marriott Resort and Spa is a 1-minute walk. Low-end restaurants may employ much less expensive chefs than high-end restaurants, creating a constraint on their daily food variety and quality. Sometimes, although low-end quality could be initially optimal, aging technology or facilities may lower current (less durable) low-end quality below optimal levels. Firms suffer similar low-end constraints when their product lines consist of disparate cores that require different locations, technologies, equipment, or processes (e.g., beauty salons, electronics, tailors, etc.). Here, firms bundle low-end to achieve optimal line differentiation. Usually, the low-end bundle

Figure 3. Hotels Bundle Low-End and Unbundle High-End (InterContinental Hotels Group)

3TAYBRIDGE3UITESLOWEND

Complimentary services

)NTERNETACCESS 7I&I ,AUNDRYFACILITY "USINESSSERVICES#OPIERPRINTERSCANNER &ITNESSCENTER 0OOL %VENINGRECEPTION4HREEDAYSPERWEEK

)NTER#ONTINENTAL(OTELSHIGHEND

Fees and surcharges
0ACKAGEDELIVERYFEESn (OLIDAYSURCHARGESn )NTERNETFEESn 2ESORTFEESn 0ARKINGFEESnPERNIGHT &ITNESSCENTERFEES5PTOPERDAY -INIBARRESTOCKINGn %ARLYCHECKINFEES!VERAGEn #HARITABLEDONATIONSn )NROOMCOFFEEANDTEAnTEABAG -AIDSERVICEnPERROOM /THER0ORTERAGEFEESBAGSTORAGEFEES TOURISMFEESSERVICECHARGESENERGY SURCHARGESLUGGAGESTORAGEFEESAND INROOMSAFEFEES

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

127

Table 2. Opposite Bundling Strategies in Different Industries

Industries routinely using high-end bundling (high-end core includes many ancillary services)
Airlines Cruises Trains Concerts Car washes Amusement parks Vacation packages

Industries routinely using low-end bundling (low-end core includes many ancillary services)
Hotels Restaurant chains Tailors Resorts/Casinos Electronics Tax consultants (flat rate on low-end) Beauty salons

includes ancillary products that are less attractive to high-end buyers (i.e., minimizing cannibalization); e.g., low-end hotels bundle lower-quality breakfasts, slower Internet, and outside self-parking. These two types of differentiation constraints relate to the complex costs of the quality provision.
1.2. Product Line Optimization This section and Section 1.3 review related research on product lines and bundling, respectively. Full product line optimization is a very challenging combinatorial problem, involving both discrete (number of products) and continuous (quality and price) variables, seldom solvable via algebraic approaches. Thus, past studies often employ numerical approaches (Urban 1969, Green and Krieger 1985, Dobson and Kalish 1988, McBride and Zufryden 1988, Wilson and Norton 1989, Aydin and Ryan 2000, Belloni et al. 2008). For example, developing a simulated annealing code, Toubia et al. (2007) establish a procedure to optimize a product line (for reviews on product-line optimization, see Hauser et al. 2006 and Hauser 2011). Rather than taking a numerical (optimization) approach, however, we adopt an analytical (strategic) approach because we seek to explain a qualitative paradox (i.e., bundling at different ends of the line).
Although no articles consider bundling ancillary services with core products in a product line, the past literature does examine related product-line issues. For example, considering product-line competition, Katz (1984) finds that facing severe competition on some products in a product line, firms may not produce the entire line to maximize the profits from other products in the line. Anderson and Dana (2009) study the optimal number of qualities in a product line under quality constraints (Acharyya 1998, Johnson and Myatt 2003). Shugan (1989) explains why producers of super-premium quality offer smaller assortments than those of lesser quality. Desai (2001) studies quality decisions and their impact on line cannibalization. To prevent cannibalization, some researchers suggest lowering the quality of the lowest-quality product below the level preferred by the lowervaluation segment (Kumar et al. 2010). However, Desai

(2001) finds conditions when cannibalization does not produce this effect. For example, Desai (2001) shows even a monopolist may find it optimal to provide efficient (desired) quality to each segment when the market is not fully covered. Villas-Boas (2004) shows communication costs affect product-line design. For example, when advertising is costly, it may be optimal to offer a small number of products in the line. Advertising costs can also lead to lower prices for the highend and higher prices for the low-end. Orhun (2009) finds context effects created by a product line may cause firms to compress the range of qualities in the line. Coughlan (1987) finds manufacturers of narrow product lines tend to use independent intermediaries.
Similar to Desai (2001) and others (Mussa and Rosen 1978, Moorthy 1988, Zhao 2000), we consider sellers offering vertically differentiated product lines with at least two varieties (i.e., low-end and high-end). For example, airlines, high-speed trains, and cruises offer both economy and first-class accommodations. Hotel and restaurant chains often have budget and luxury locations; e.g., Darden Restaurants operates low-end steakhouses such as LongHorn Steakhouse and very expensive high-end steakhouses such as The Capital Grille. However, unlike prior research, considering differentiation constraints (i.e., optimal core differentiation is infeasible), our model predicts whether different industries will bundle low-end or high-end.
1.3. Bundling Ancillary Products The definitions of core and ancillary services may depend on perceptions that can vary with prevailing laws, cultural norms, contexts, industry standards, historical traditions, and so forth. For example, there are spirited debates regarding whether airlines should ethically provide particular services, e.g., free carryon bags, or whether restaurants should provide free restrooms as part of their core services. Extant research often lacks precise definitions.
We adopt simple operational definitions. Note, when a product or service is always bundled with a core, it might be operationally impossible to distinguish it from the core. For example, since airlines always bundle seatbelts with the cores, it may seem impossible

128

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

to determine objectively whether seatbelts are part of the core service or they are one of the ancillary services. To avoid this somewhat philosophical debate, we define the core as the bundle of all products and services that all sellers in the market always provide at a single price. For example, hotels' core quality includes staffing, rooms, furniture, maintenance, security, and so on.
We define ancillary services as having three features. First, they have less value than the core. Second, they are sometimes but not always bundled with a core. Third, when unbundled, buyers can purchase the seller's ancillary service only with the corresponding core. For example, diners at a high-end restaurant (e.g., The Capital Grille) cannot get the low-end side salad from a low-end restaurant (e.g., LongHorn Steakhouse). We consider one ancillary service to model bundling strategies in a product line; however, the ancillary service can consist of many different services.
We investigate how firms bundle ancillary services with different cores in a vertical product line. No prior research studies this topic. However, the literature reveals conditions when bundling can be profitable. Stigler (1963) shows how negatively correlated consumer valuations for two goods can make bundling more profitable than unbundling even without demand complementarity or scope economies. Adams and Yellen (1976) expand on Stigler (1963), suggesting that mixed bundling (offering of both separate component goods and bundled goods) dominates pure bundling, but nearly any welfare outcome is possible with pure bundling. Schmalensee (1984) suggests that pure bundling can be more profitable than unbundling because bundling reduces the dispersion of consumer valuations, which allows an efficient extraction of consumer surplus. Particularly, mixed bundling is superior under general conditions (McAfee et al. 1989) because it retains any benefits from bundling while increasing the number of prices available to capture additional consumer surplus. However, mixed bundling might not apply to add-ons because, for example, airlines do not sell in-flight meals without the flight ticket. In general, when to bundle is complex. As Fang and Norman (2006, p. 946) note, "the profit-improving role of mixed bundling has nothing [to] do with exploiting negative correlations of valuation distributions." "The profitability issue still is not completely settled" (Chen and Riordan 2013, p. 51).
Moreover, past studies consider bundling in various interfaces. Balachander et al. (2010) consider the interface between price promotions and bundling, and find that bundle discounts can increase profits by creating endogenous loyalty. Lin (2016) argues that an optional add-on (e.g., Wi-Fi at high-end hotels) can intensify competition in contrast to standard conclusions in the literature (e.g., Ellison 2005). If both firms

sell an optional add-on, they will price aggressively to compete for consumers who trade off the higherquality base versus the lower-quality base plus the add-on. Shugan and Moon (2015) find bundling can act as a signal that the bundled add-on has wide appeal at current prices (unlike quality signaling). Rust and Chung (2006) consider customer relationships including the interface between bundling and service pricing, concluding that relationship models should focus on marketing interventions rather than the financial impact of customers. Considering bundling in auctions, Subramaniam and Venkatesh (2009) find that the auction of unbundled products is superior to that of bundled products for most substitutes.
2. Model: Product Lines Without Add-ons
Considering a firm that provides the core and ancillary services, we define a general decision sequence for bundling-within-line decisions. First, the forwardlooking firm decides whether to have a single (core) product or a product line, i.e., two (core) products. Second, the firm decides whether to bundle or unbundle the ancillary service. Given a product line, the firm can bundle the ancillary service with the low-end core or high-end core; if not, the firm unbundles the ancillary service at both ends. Third, the firm chooses the quality of the core product(s) and ancillary service(s). Fourth, the firm sets prices for the core product(s) and, if unbundled, ancillary service(s). We start with a benchmark model without bundling. Section 3 incorporates bundling and derives the optimal product-line and bundling decisions.
2.1. Consumer Segments This section models consumer choice involving various offers in a product-line context. To justify a product line, there must be at least two market segments (Moorthy 1984) so that the line induces self-selection (Kolay and Shaffer 2003). Consistent with Occam's razor (Kalt and Zupan 1984), we seek to explain observed market behavior with two (the minimum number of) segments that, of course, should still be realistic and consistent with empirical observations.
Consider two market segments: low-end (L) and high-end (H). Let  > 0 and  +  denote the willingness-to-pay (WTP) per unit quality for L and H, respectively, where  > 0; L pays less for quality than H. Segment L may include families with many children, students, consumers with limited budgets, and simply those who only want the basic low quality. Segment H may include business travelers, high-income consumers, and those who merely obtain substantial utility from additional quality. Both segments buy at most one unit. We assume  > ; otherwise (i.e., when L has very low WTP for quality), the firm has no incentive to maintain a low-end product for L, i.e.,

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

129

no product line exists. Without loss of generality, we assume consumers' reservation utility is zero. For simplicity, we consider each segment as one consumer.
The analysis occasionally requires unambiguous resolution of cases when consumers are indifferent between two options. In those cases, following standard conventions, we assume the firm can induce the purchase of the more profitable option with an infinitesimally small reduction in the price of that option. For example, when a consumer is indifferent between the low-end and high-end products, we assume the consumer buys the high-end product.

2.2. Firm's Problem Without Differentiation

Constraints

We first consider the benchmark case when the firm

suffers no (differentiation) constraints. Consistent with

the traditional product-line literature, we assume that

the firm's marginal cost of producing quality Q is cQ2

for some constant c > 0. With a single product, the

firm decides the quality (QS) and price (PS) to maxi-

mize the single-product profits (PS) DS(PS - cQS2),

where DS 2 for PS  QS, DS 1 for QS < PS 

( + )QS, and DS 0 for PS > ( + )QS. Given QS,

the optimal price is P1 QS or P2 ( + )QS,

yielding (P1) 2(QS - cQS2) and (P2) ( + )

QS

-

cQ

2 S

.

Accordingly,

the

optimal

quality

is

Q1

/(2c) or Q2 ( + )/(2c); thus, the optimal single-

product profits are 1 (P1; Q1) 2/(2c) or 2 (P2; Q2) ( + )2/(4c), respectively.

With a product line (low-end/high-end), the firm

chooses the low-end quality (QL) and the high-end quality (QH > QL), and the firm sets the prices PL and PH for the low-end and high-end, respectively. The firm's problem can be written as

max
PL , PH , QL , QH

PL + PH - cQL2 - cQH2

subject to PL  QL, PH  ( + )QH, and ( + )QH - PH  ( + )QL - PL. Lemma 1 follows.
Lemma 1. Without any constraints on quality, product-line profits are greater than single-product profits.

Lemma 1 shows the traditional product-line model

result; i.e., without quality constraints, a product line

produces greater profits than a single product (Mussa

and Rosen 1978, Moorthy 1984, Anderson and Dana

2009). Given QL and QH, it is optimal to sell the low-end product at L's WTP and set the high-end price such that

it makes H indifferent between two products. There-

fore, the optimal prices are PL QL and PH ( + ) ·

QH - QL; the product-line profits are (QL , QH)

( - )QL + ( + )QH

-

cQ

2 L

-

cQH2 ;

the

optimal

low-end and high-end quality is QL ( - )/(2c) and QH ( + )/(2c), respectively. Finally, the opti-

mal product-line profits are  ( - )2/(4c) +

( + )2/(4c), which is greater than both 1 and 2 . For more general demand functions, see Anderson and Celik (2015).
We can also derive the optimal product differentiation  QH - QL /c. However, the firm may not always achieve the desired-level of product differentiation using only the core. The prior literature recognizes technological constraints on quality (Schmidt-Mohr and Villas-Boas 2008, Anderson and Dana 2009). There may also be technological constraints on differentiation. As explained in Section 1.1, exogenous industry characteristics (e.g., technology, location, inherent design limitations, standards, and regulatory restrictions) and aging sometimes make the core differentiation too low (e.g., airlines, cruises) and other times too high (e.g., hotels, restaurants).
When the core differentiation is too low, we prove that price discrimination on core quality is less profitable than a single quality. However, we show that high-end bundling can increase product-line profits by making high-end products more attractive, thereby achieving the optimal differentiation. Airlines, for example, bundle their high-end seats with premium entertainment and executive lounges that offer complementary buffets, Wi-Fi, showers, spirits, and more.
When the core differentiation is too high, we prove that a product line is inferior to selling a single (highly profitable) product. Given this high core differentiation, the opportunity cost of selling low-end products to low-end buyers is too high, and thus it is optimal to sell a single product (with intermediate quality) to everyone. However, we show that the firm finds it optimal to offer two different cores when the firm produces the ancillary service because by low-end bundling, the firm can make the low-end product more attractive and decrease the line differentiation to the optimal level. Hotel chains, for example, bundle budget hotel rooms with parking, Wi-Fi, breakfasts, newspapers, mini-refrigerators (for personal use), and more.
2.3. Firm's Problem with Differentiation Constraints
Before considering bundling in the product line, we examine how differentiation constraints affect product-line profits. We consider two constraints: (1) QH - QL   for some constant 0 <  <  and (2) QH - QL  ¯ for some constant ¯ > , where  /c, the optimal unconstrained line differentiation derived in Section 2.2. The first (high-end differentiation) constraint implies that the firm can only achieve the product differentiation below the optimal level (). Analogously, the second (low-end differentiation) constraint implies that the firm can only achieve the product differentiation above the optimal level.
The two exogenous parameters,  and ¯, represent the degree of the high-end and low-end differentiation

130

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

constraints, respectively. Given a high-end (low-end) differentiation constraint, the firm's choices of core qualities become more restricted as  (¯) decreases (increases). For example, compare Florida's Disney World (Disney) with Busch Gardens. Disney has four theme parks, two water parks, one golf course, and one recreation complex, while Busch Gardens has two theme parks and two water parks. Both amusement parks may suffer high-end differentiation constraints because visitors have similar experiences in parks managed by the same company, in very close proximity, sharing many resources (e.g., weather, accommodations, transportation, technology, etc.). However, Busch Gardens may suffer a stricter differentiation constraint because it has less ability to create varied core tickets from only two parks. In general, firms with fewer core resources and less flexibility may suffer a more restrictive differentiation constraint. Proposition 1 follows.

Proposition 1. Without add-ons ancillary services , given QH - QL  , single-product profits are greater than product-line profits when   /4 given QH - QL  ¯, single-product profits are greater than product-line profits when ¯  2.

Proposition 1 proves that when the firm suffers a

differentiation constraint, it can be optimal to offer a

single quality rather than two qualities (i.e., a product

line). With the high-end differentiation constraint (i.e.,

it is infeasible to design a high-end product such that

it provides sufficiently high quality relative to a low-

end product), the firm provides the optimal low-end

quality (QL ) while the firm can only produce quality

Q

 L

+



<

QH

for

the

high-end.

When

the

product

dif-

ferentiation is too small (i.e.,   /4), the profit loss

caused by preventing the low-end product's cannibal-

ization (i.e., a lower high-end price) exceeds the profit

gain from the price discrimination in the product line.

Therefore, the firm finds it optimal to produce a single

product with intermediate quality (QL < Q1 < QH ). Analogously, the low-end differentiation constraint
limits low-end quality to QH - ¯ < QL (i.e., too much differentiation) although the firm offers the optimal

high-end quality QH . Without bundling, it is difficult to reduce the line differentiation to the optimal level given the (low-end) differentiation constraint (¯  2).

Maintaining a low-end product (i.e., a product line) for

L at a very low price can be less profitable than pro-

ducing a single intermediate quality.

3. Model: Product Lines with Add-ons
We have shown that a differentiation constraint can make a single product more profitable than a product line. However, given a differentiation constraint, this section proves that a product line is more profitable

than a single product when the firm provides ancillary services and adopts an optimal bundling strategy. More important, we also find the optimal bundling strategy depends on the type of differentiation constraint (i.e., high-end or low-end).
3.1. Bundling Decision Considering the core and ancillary services, we incorporate bundling strategies into our product-line model. Given a product line, the firm has four bundling strategies: (1) bundling the ancillary service at both the low-end and high-end (BB), (2) unbundling the ancillary service at the low-end and bundling at the high-end (UB), (3) bundling the ancillary service at the low-end and unbundling at the high-end (BU), and (4) unbundling the ancillary service at both the low-end and high-end (UU). When bundling at the low-end or high-end, the firm chooses the bundled core quality for the low-end (QBL) or high-end (QBH), respectively. When unbundling at the low-end or highend, the firm chooses both the unbundled core quality and the unbundled ancillary quality for the low-end (QL , qL) or high-end (QH , qH), respectively.
For bundling (B), instead of modeling what constitutes the bundle, for convenience, we assume firms consider the bundle as one product, i.e., the ancillary products are part of the core. This implies that to increase the core quality, the bundled ancillary products should match the core quality. For example, Delta Air Lines bundles Delta One (high-end) with high-end ancillary services including chef-curated meals, Master Sommelier selected wine pairings, and Tumi amenities. Choosing bundle quality Q as one product, the firm incurs bundle cost cQ2.
For unbundling (U), similar to B, it incurs core cost cQ2 given core quality Q. However, unlike B, the unbundled ancillary products are not part of the core, i.e., rather than increasing the core quality for all buyers, firms obtain extra ancillary profits from only some buyers. Hence, firms can choose unbundled ancillary products without the need to match the core quality so that unbundled ancillary products might differ from those that are bundled. For the prior example, the bundled high-quality (high-cost) ancillary products that match Delta One are often not available to Basic Economy, i.e., the low-end offers a different composition and quality of unbundled ancillary products. To capture this difference between B and U, let a > 0 denote consumers' WTP per unit quality of the unbundled ancillary products. We assume a <  because consumers' WTP for the (unbundled) ancillary products is less than that for the core. Last, given unbundled ancillary quality qU > 0, the firm incurs additional ancillary cost cqU2 , which reflects that the unbundled ancillary products are not part of the core. The online appendix provides more examples that support our utility and cost functions for B and U.

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

131

3.2. Single Core Product
In this section, we prove that with a single product,
U (unbundling) dominates B (bundling). For B, given
bundle quality QB, the optimal bundled core price is PB1 QB or PB2 ( + )QB. The single-product bundling profits are

B(PS; QB)

2(QB - cQB2 )

for PS PB1,

(

+

)Q

B

-

c

Q

2 B

for PS

PB2 .

The optimal bundle quality is QB1 /(2c) and QB2 ( + )/(2c) for PS PB1 and PS PB2. Thus, the optimal bundling profits are B 1 (PB1; QB1) 2/(2c) or B 2 (PB2; QB2) ( + )2/(4c).
For U, given core quality QU and unbundled ancillary quality qU, the optimal core price is PU1 QU or PU2 ( + )QU, and the optimal unbundled ancillary price is pU a qU. The single-product unbundling
profits are

U (PS , ps ; QU , qU )

 

2(QU

-

c QU2

+

a

qU

-

cqU2 )

  

for PS

PU1, ps

pU ,

 

(

+

)QU

-

c QU2

+

a

qU

-

c qU2

 

for PS

PU2, ps

pU .



The optimal core quality is QU1 /(2c) and QU2 ( + )/(2c) for PS PU1 and PS PU2, and the optimal ancillary quality is qU a/(2c); the optimal unbundling profits are U 1 (PU1, pU ; QU1, qU ) 2/(2c) + a2/(2c) or U 2 (PU2, pU ; QU2, qU ) ( + )2/(4c) + a2/(4c). Hence, the optimal single-product profits are  max{U 1, U 2} because U 1 > B 1 and U 2 > B 2.
When the firm chooses the quality of both the
core (whether bundled or unbundled) and (if unbun-
dled) the ancillary service, unbundling is optimal. By
unbundling, the firm can obtain additional ancillary
sales while choosing an optimal core quality without
the ancillary service.

3.3. Product-Line Bundling with Differentiation Constraints
This section derives our primary results, consistent with our empirical analysis, that bundling occurs at the high-end when the core differentiation is low, and vice versa. Given a product line, the firm has four bundling strategies: BB, UB, BU, and UU. For example, choosing a BB strategy, the firm decides the bundle quality for the low-end (QBL) and high-end (QBH) and sets the bundle prices for the low-end (PBL) and high-end (PBH).
The firm's product-line bundling problem can be written as

max 

PBL

+

PBH

-

cQ

2 BL

-

c

Q

2 BH

+

 L (PL

-

cQ

2 L

+

pL

-

c q L2

-

PBL

+

cQB2 L)

+

H

(PH

-

c

Q

2 H

+

pH

-

c

qH2

-

PBH

+

c

Q

2 BH

)

subject to

max{LPL , (1 - L)PBL }

 max{L QL , (1 - L)QBL },

(IR-1)

max{H PH , (1 - H)PBH }

 max{H( + )QH , (1 - H)( + )QBH }, (IR-2)

L pL  L a qL , H pH  H a qH ,

(IR-3, IR-4)

max H[( + )QH - PH + a qH - pH],

(1 - H)[( + )QBH - PBH]

 max L[( + )QL - PL + a qL - pL],

(1 - L)[( + )QBL - PBL] ,

(IC)

and a differentiation constraint (QH - QL   or QH - QL  ¯), where L 1 for UB and UU and H 1 for BU and UU; otherwise, L 0 and H 0, and  {i , PBi , Pi , pi , QBi , Qi , qi for i L, H}.
The product-line optimization problem involves
bundling decisions under either the high-end or low-
end differentiation constraint. Proposition 2 shows
how a UB strategy can improve the product-line profits
under the high-end differentiation constraint.

Proposition 2. Given QH - QL  , a UB strategy is optimal if and only if  <  - a/(2c). More specifically, the

firm develops a product line. For the low-end, unbundling

the ancillary service, the firm offers the core quality QL

( - )/(2c) at price PL QL and the ancillary quality

qL a/(2c) at price pL a qL . For the high-end, bundling

the ancillary service, the firm offers the bundle quality QB H

( + )/(2c) at price PB H

(

+

)Q

 BH

-

QL

.

The

optimal

product-line profits are UB  + a2/(4c).

Proposition 2 predicts that when the firm is unable

to achieve sufficient core differentiation, the firm will

unbundle the ancillary service at the low-end and

bundle it at the high-end. This case tends to occur

when H has a much greater WTP than L (i.e., larger 

and  /c) because the product-line profits increase

with  without differentiation constraints and, with

bundling, the firm can increase the high-end bundle

quality (QBH) to the optimal level despite the high-end differentiation constraint (QH - QL  ).
Under QH - QL  , the firm has de facto no qual-
ity constraint on the low-end core, choosing the opti-

mal low-end core quality QL ( - )/(2c) without bundling. Then, selling the unbundled ancillary ser-

vice, the firm increases the low-end profits. However,

for the high-end, the firm can only achieve (at most)

quality QH

Q

 L

+



<

QB H

with

only

the

core.

Thus,

the firm bundles the ancillary service to increase the

high-end quality to the optimal level by adding ancil-

lary quality of at least qH

Q

 BH

-

(QL

+

)

/c - .

This implies that when differentiating the core is more

difficult (i.e., smaller ), additional high-end bundling

becomes optimal.

132

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

Last, when consumers have a greater WTP for the ancillary service (larger a), UU becomes more profitable than UB because the firm gains more profits from selling unbundled ancillary services than increasing the high-end quality by bundling high-quality (highcost) ancillary services that match the high-end core (see the appendix for the proof). Proposition 3 shows analogous results when the firm suffers the low-end differentiation constraint (QH - QL  ¯).

Proposition 3. Given QH - QL  ¯, a BU strategy is optimal if and only if ¯ >  + a/(2c). More specifically, the firm develops a product line. For the low-end, bundling

the ancillary service, the firm offers the bundle quality

Q

 BL

( - )/(2c) at price PB L

QB L. For the high-end,

unbundling the ancillary service, the firm offers the core

quality

Q

 H

( + )/(2c) at price PH

(

+

)Q

 H

-

Q

 BL

and the ancillary quality qH a/(2c) at price pH a qH .

The optimal product-line profits are BU  + a2/(4c).

Proposition 3 predicts that when the core only allows

high differentiation, it is optimal to bundle the ancil-

lary service at the low-end and unbundle it at the high-

end. This outcome tends to occur when consumers of

both segments have a similar WTP (i.e., smaller  and

 /c) because the optimal quality difference () in

the line decreases without differentiation constraints,

and bundling enables the firm to increase the low-end

quality (i.e., reduce line differentiation) to the opti-

mal level despite the low-end differentiation constraint (QH - QL  ¯).
Under QH - QL  ¯, the firm has no binding quality constraint on the high-end core, choosing the opti-

mal high-end core quality QH ( + )/(2c) without bundling while selling the unbundled ancillary service

at the high-end. However, at the low-end, the differ-

entiation constraint only allows (at most) quality QL

Q

 H

-

¯

<

QB L.

Hence,

increasing

the

low-end

quality

by bundling is optimal. The minimum ancillary qual-

ity the firm adds to the low-end by bundling is qL

Q

 BL

-

(QH

-

¯)

/c + ¯. This implies that when the core

differentiation exceeds the optimal level to a greater

extent (larger ¯), bundling more ancillary services with the low-end core is optimal.
When bundling low-end, firms may carefully choose low-end ancillary products that are unattractive to high-end buyers (i.e., not to cannibalize). For example, Figure 4 shows a bundled low-end (low-cost) breakfast that is less attractive to high-end buyers.
Last, with large a, UU is more profitable than BU because the firm obtains more profits from selling high-quality unbundled ancillary services than increasing the low-end quality by bundling lowquality (low-cost) ancillary services that match the low-end core. In practice, UU might be rare because there might always be some ancillary services with small a.
Table 3 encapsulates our theoretical results. Without add-ons, a single quality is optimal when a differentiation constraint is highly restrictive (i.e., small  or large ¯). See Figure 5 (left panel, regions labeled Single Product). However, a larger  (more heterogeneous consumers) makes a product line more profitable. See Figure 5 (left panel, center triangular region labeled Product Line). When firms can bundle ancillary products, a product line dominates a single product because bundling allows an optimal line differentiation. Given a highly restricted high-end (low-end) differentiation constraint, i.e., small  (large ¯), bundling high-end (low-end) is optimal. See Figure 5 (right panel, regions labeled UB and BU).
4. Empirical Analysis
Casual empirical observations in many industries suggest correlations between bundling and line (core) differentiation. This section shows, more formally, that our theoretical predictions are consistent with our preliminary empirical observations. Although we provide initial findings, our (highly significant) statistical results across several industries are very encouraging.
We collect publicly available data on product lines and ancillary services that exhibit large diversity in line differentiation, competition, and product

Figure 4. Low-End versus High-End Ancillary Products

Bundled low-end hotel breakfast

Unbundled high-end hotel breakfast

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

133

Table 3. Optimal Product-Line and Bundling Decisions

Differentiation constraint

High-end (QH - QL  )

Low-end (QH - QL  ¯)

More restrictive

Less restrictive

More restrictive

Less restrictive

Without add-ons With add-ons

 <  -  Single product
 <  -  UB

 >  -  Product line
 >  -  UU

¯ >  +  Single product
¯ >  +  BU

¯ <  +  Product line
¯ <  +  UU

Note. The expressions of  > 0,  > 0, and  > 0 are in the appendix; / > 0, / > 0, and / 0 (see Figure 5).

Figure 5. Optimal Product-Line and Bundling Decisions

Single

A

B

product

UB

Product line C

*(or )

*(or )

UU

Single

product

BU

Without add-ons (c =1) A: = * ­ ; B: *= = ; C: = * + ;

With add-ons (c =1)

QH ­ QL  ;

QH ­ QL 

type. We randomly select six firms each from eight industries (product categories) including airlines, car washes, amusement parks, concerts (live events), hotels (lodging), restaurants, guitars (musical instruments), and digital cameras (Table 4 shows the industry identifiers, and Table 5 describes our procedure to sample firms). In their product lines, we randomly select 271 core products (brands). Usually, firm websites, like Disney World, explicitly distinguish their cores (e.g., admission to different theme parks) from their ancillary services (e.g., parking, souvenirs, food, etc.).
All of our firms offer product lines. For example, Disney's product line consists of tickets with

Table 4. Identifiers for Eight Industries

Identifier (k)

Industry

Identifier (k) Industry

1

Airlines

5

Hotels (lodging)

2

Car washes

6

Restaurants

3

Amusement parks

7

Guitars

(musical

instruments)

4

Concerts (live events)

8

Digital cameras

admission to different numbers of Disney parks (e.g., Magic Kingdom, Epcot, Hollywood Studios, Animal Kingdom, etc.). Park Place Car Wash has a product line consisting of Self Service, Full Service Washes, and Detail Packages. Moreover, firms in our industries

Table 5. Description of Sampling Procedure

Industry

Number of Number of sampled firms total firms

Search platform

Airlines

6

14 U.S. Department of

Transportation

Car washesa

6

56 Google

Amusement parksb

6

25 TripAdvisor

Concerts

6

Over 1,000 Premium Seats USA

Hotelsc

6

767 Expedia

Restaurantsd

6

49 Wikipedia

Guitars

6

15 Amazon

Digital cameras

6

29 Amazon

Notes. From our search results, we randomly sample six firms that
have a product line. aGoogle finds 56 car wash services in Florida. bTripAdvisor recommends 25 amusement parks in the United
States. cExpedia finds 767 hotels in Orlando, Florida. dWikipedia provides a list of 49 restaurant parent companies.

134

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

offer various ancillary products. For example, Yamaha, a guitar manufacturer, provides amplifiers, tuners, hard cases, stands, picks, and more. Sweetwater Car Wash provides ancillary products such as triple coat conditioner, clear coat sealer, total vehicle protectant, tire shine, and more.
We classify the industries based on the degree of core differentiation. The first four industries (airlines, car washes, amusement parks, and concerts) suffer highend differentiation constraints because firms deliver services at the same geographic location, and products in their product lines share the same core technology, limiting the high-end core quality. By contrast, the remaining industries suffer low-end differentiation constraints because low-end products lack some of the technologies or locations available to high-end products. For example, it is not economical for low-end digital cameras to use magnesium alloy bodies, sophisticated metering, and cross-type sensors employed by high-end digital cameras. It is not economical for lowend restaurants to employ expensive celebrity chefs found at high-end restaurants. Based on this classification, we define eight differentiation-constraint indicators for eight industries

IkH D C (k )

 

1

if k

k and industry k exhibits

 high-end differentiation constraint,

 

0

otherwise,

 for k 1, . . . , 4, k 1, . . . , 8,

IkLD C (k )

 

1

if k

k and industry k exhibits

 low-end differentiation constraint,

 

0

otherwise,

 for k 5, . . . , 8, k 1, . . . , 8.

High-end differentiation constraints often occur when firms deliver both high-end and low-end services at the same location. For instance, whether flying first class or economy class on the same flight, passengers experience the same departure time, arrival time, in-flight delays, runway delays, weather, cancellations, diversions, turbulence, etc. Hence, airlines face technological constraints that limit their ability to differentiate their core (without add-ons). To increase line differentiation, airlines may bundle highend. Similarly, concertgoers see the same concert at the same location. Bundling better seats with ancillary services (e.g., preshow parties, souvenirs, host services, etc.) creates more differentiated high-end products. Amusement park visitors may experience the same attractions and weather; however, bundling high-end tickets with ancillary services such as priority queues, meals, valet parking, and early admission increases line differentiation.
By contrast, low-end differentiation constraints can occur when firms deliver high-end and low-end services at different locations. For example, multibrand restaurant chains locate restaurants at different locations.

High-end upscale steakhouses (e.g., Darden's The Capital Grille, Bloomin's Fleming's) locate in high-income (high-rent) locations with highly differentiated facilities from their low-end counterparts (e.g., Darden's LongHorn, Bloomin's Outback). Low-end restaurants have lower-paid chefs, less daily menu variety (and quality), and less fresh ingredients (e.g., frozen fish). Compensating for their low quality, low-end restaurants bundle salads, sides, desserts, etc. Similarly, luxury hotels (e.g., Hyatt's Park Resorts, Marriott's Ritz-Carlton) usually locate in areas desired by highincome travelers unlike their low-end counterparts (e.g., Hyatt's Place hotel, Marriott's Fairfield hotel). Moreover, as low-end (often less durable) facilities age, their quality levels may fall. For these industries, lowend bundling is the norm because bundling improves low-end profitability, making a product line optimal.
There is another possibly compelling reason for bundling ancillary products at the low-end. Consider a low-end Marriott hotel. In improving the low-end core quality (e.g., furnishings, rooms, amenities), the low-end Marriott can cannibalize Marriott's high-end hotels. In contrast, by bundling low-end add-ons (e.g., inexpensive breakfasts, moderate-speed Internet, outside self-parking, basic entertainment), the low-end Marriott can improve its quality without making it attractive to high-end buyers who do not value low-end add-ons as much as low-end buyers.
Our arguments about differentiation constraints may apply to many industries. For example, although cruises appear similar to hotels because cruises provide lodging services, cruises are actually more similar to airlines because passengers on the same cruise travel on the same ship with the same weather, departure (arrival) times, staff, ship facilities, and security regardless of their accommodations. Hence, we observe high-end bundling similar to airlines rather than low-end bundling similar to hotels. Typical highend cruise accommodations include 24-hour butler service, Bvlgari toiletries, bathrobes, personalized stationary, wines, Blu-ray players, etc.
Since our bundling theory also depends on the target market (i.e., high-end versus low-end), we divide core products (brands) into three groups: high-end, intermediate, and low-end. When a core product's price belongs to the upper third in a product line, we categorize the core as high-end. When a core product's price belongs to the bottom third in a product line, we categorize the core as low-end. We consider the remaining as intermediate. Accordingly, we define a product-locality variable

 

3

if core i is a high-end product,

PL(i)  2 if core i is an intermediate product,

 

1

if core i is a low-end product,

 for i 1, . . . , 271.

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

135

Although bundling could possibly change product locality, it is extremely rare. For example, Fairfield Inn cannot achieve the quality of Ritz-Carlton by merely bundling additional services. Hence, PL is exogenous. We define eight industry indicators

Jk (k)

1 if k k , 0 if k k , for k

1, . . . , 8, k 1, . . . , 8.

Finally, the number of ancillary products (or services) bundled with core i in industry k(APik) is used as our dependent variable (i.e., count data).
To examine whether firms bundle more ancillary products at the low-end or high-end given a differentiation constraint, we conduct the following Poisson regression:

log E[APik | IkHDC(k), IkLDC(k), PL(i), Jk (i),  k , k , k ]

0 +

k IkHDC(k) × PL(i) +

k IkLDC(k)

k 1,...,4

k 5,...,8

× PL(i) + k Jk (i).

(1)

k8

Controlling the industry averages, we regress the number of bundled ancillary products on the interactions between the differentiation-constraint type and product locality. We exclude PL and J8 from Equation (1) to avoid perfect multicollinearity problems. We estimate Equation (1) by the maximum likelihood estimation given that APik follows a Poisson distribution.
Table 6 provides parameter estimates. We find industries exhibiting high-end differentiation constraints (e.g., airlines), consistent with our predictions, tend to bundle more at the high-end (e.g., 1 0.849, p < 0.01) because bundling enables firms to increase highend quality to the optimal level. Like the airline industry, Table 6 reveals positive interaction effects for the other industries exhibiting high-end differentiation constraints. By contrast, industries exhibiting low-end differentiation constraints (e.g., hotels), consistent with our predictions, tend to bundle more at the low-end (e.g., 5 -0.372, p < 0.01) because bundling enables them to increase low-end quality to the optimal level (possibly with items not attractive to high-end consumers).
We conclude this section by describing the productline strategies of Disney to facilitate an understanding of actual business practices. Some might think that an amusement park has one core. However, many amusement parks (e.g., Universal, Busch Gardens, Six Flags, etc.) provide more than one core (i.e., a product line). For instance, Disney provides eight different cores. Table 7 shows four of these cores. Disney, which has multiple theme parks and other activities, develops a product line by using different combinations of these parks and activities. For example, the high-end Platinum Plus ticket includes admission to

Table 6. Interaction Impact Between Differentiation Constraint and Product Locality (PL)

High-end differentiation constraint

Low-end differentiation constraint

Airline × PL

0.849 (0.115)

Car wash × PL

0.532 (0.104)

Amusement park × PL 0.331 (0.120)

Concert × PL

1.367 (0.196)

Airline

-3.505 (0.451)

Car wash

-3.043 (0.419)

Amusement park

2.524 (0.443)

Concert

-6.724 (0.632)

Likelihood ratio test (125)
Pseudo R2

Hotel × PL

-0.372 (0.130)

Restaurant × PL

-0.912 (0.376)

Guitar × PL

-0.409 (0.053)

Digital camera × PL -1.886 (0.273)

Hotel

-1.897 (0.422)

Restaurant

-2.422 (0.701)

Guitar

-0.445 (0.348)

Constant (digital camera)

3.644 (0.333)

1,211.52

0.48

Note. Standard errors are in parentheses. Significant value at 5% level; significant value at 1% level.

all parks and activities, the Silver ticket includes all theme parks except for water parks, and the Epcot ticket includes admission to the 300-acre Future World and World Showcase at Epcot theme park. Finally, the Water Parks ticket includes admission to only Disney's smaller water parks. Given different cores, Disney designs ancillary products for each core. Table 7 shows that Platinum (highest-end tickets currently priced at $729) bundles six ancillary products (e.g., parking, photos, special discounts), Silver and Epcot (intermediate tickets currently priced at $389 and $249, respectively) bundle five and four ancillary products, respectively, and Water Parks (lowest-end tickets currently priced at $115) bundles no ancillary products.
The Disney's product-line strategy is consistent with our theory. Although Disney develops a product line with different combinations of its parks, Disney may be unable to achieve the optimal level of line differentiation only with the cores because the Disney parks are in the same location and consumers in "Disney World" have similar experiences (e.g., weather, employees, souvenirs, fireworks, photos, transportation, accommodations, management, etc.), leading to lower line differentiation. To increase the line differentiation to the optimal level, Disney bundles ancillary benefits with high-end tickets. In doing so, consumers obtain sufficiently differential valuation, reducing the lowend cores' cannibalization. The online appendix shows that our findings accurately describe the product-line bundling strategies of three other firms in different

136

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

Table 7. Product Line of Disney

Platinum plus Silver Epcot Water parks

Monthly price ($) Annual price ($)
Unlimited access for one year (core) Magic Kingdom Park Epcot: Future World Epcot: International World Showcase Disney's Animal Kingdom Disney's Hollywood Studios Typhoon Lagoon and Blizzard Beach Disney's Oak Trail Golf Course ESPN Wide World of Sports complex
Additional benefits (ancillary) Same day admission to all four Walt Disney World theme parks Complimentary magic bands Exclusive passholder communications Includes Disney PhotoPass downloads Parking at Walt Disney World theme parks Special discounts and limited-time offers for resort stays, dining, merchandise, and more

55.37 729.00

25.20 12.77 389.00 249.00

-- 115.00

Note. This table reports prices that Disney charges in May 2016.

industries (MGM International Las Vegas Resorts, Delta Air Lines, and Park Place Car Wash).
5. Conclusion
Most service providers develop product lines consisting of core products that vary in quality. For example, cruise ships usually offer a product line of accommodations that differ in quality. Cunard cruise line offers both luxury staterooms as well as windowless bare-bones cabins. Many restaurant chains also have product lines with different core quality levels. The product line of Darden Restaurants consists of moderately priced steakhouses such as LongHorn Steakhouse and very expensive high-end steakhouses such as The Capital Grille. Most car washes offer less expensive self-service, moderately priced full-service, and very expensive detailing service in their product lines. Many industries also offer a variety of ancillary services (or add-ons) that are bundled (or unbundled) with a core. For example, Cunard cruise line bundles numerous ancillary services with high-end staterooms such as butler service, turndown surprise, concierge service, champagne, fresh fruit, bar (stocked with spirits/wines and soft drinks), pre-dinner canapés, books/atlas, and more.
Surprisingly, industries with ostensibly similar characteristics (e.g., cost structure, customer types, competition, and distribution channels) use different bundling strategies. For example, airlines usually bundle high-end international first class with ancillary services (e.g., premium entertainment, chef-curated breakfast, and executive lounges) while hotels usually

bundle low-end locations with ancillary services (e.g., entertainment, breakfast, and on-site self-parking). Conversely, hotels tend to unbundle at the high-end and charge for ancillary services (e.g., recently released movies, gourmet breakfast, and valet parking) while airlines tend to unbundle at the low-end and charge for ancillary services (e.g., meals, baggage handling). There is no existing theory that explains why these similar industries adopt different bundling strategies.
We explain this apparent paradox by postulating an inherent difference in core differentiation between the low-end and high-end, which these empirical observations evidently demonstrate. Consider airlines offering air transportation as their core service. Although airlines can provide high-quality first-class seats (more legroom and storage), these seats are on the same plane as coach seats. For example, first class departs and arrives at the same time as economy class. Both classes experience the same delays, weather conditions, cancellations, diversions, time on the runway, in-flight turbulence, and so on. Thus, airlines face technological constraints when attempting to differentiate first class from coach. Similarly, industries in the first column of Table 2 exhibit relatively low levels of core differentiation because, again, technology (or location) limits the quality difference between the low-end and high-end cores. Given low core differentiation, firms may bundle additional exclusive services with their high-end core. For example, even though cruise ships provide lodging services like hotels, cruises are more similar to airlines because all passengers (steerage cabins and grand staterooms) are on the same ship. Consistent

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

137

with our theory, high-end cabins include many bundled ancillary services (e.g., butler service). Our empirical analysis also finds, consistent with our theory, that high-end amusement park tickets bundle many ancillary services (e.g., priority queues, valet parking).
By contrast, industries in the second column of Table 2 exhibit high degrees of differentiation between their low-end and high-end cores. For example, lowend restaurants may employ much less expensive chefs than high-end restaurants creating a constraint on their daily menu variety and food quality. Of course, it is too costly for low-end restaurants to employ celebrity chefs who can create new gourmet menus each night. In this case, restaurants bundle low-end to achieve the optimal line differentiation. Rather than varying the menu, low-end restaurants bundle salads, sides, and desserts. In general, low-end restaurants bundle ancillary products that are less attractive to high-end customers (i.e., minimize cannibalization) such as regular salads, ready-made sides, and preprepared desserts. Similarly, by bundling lower-quality ancillary services, for example, moderate-speed Internet, inexpensive breakfasts, and outside parking, an aging low-end hotel can improve the low-end core quality without making it attractive to high-end buyers. High-end buyers may only value high-speed Internet, gourmet breakfasts, and garage parking. In those industries that exhibit high levels of line differentiation, low-end bundling is pervasive.
Our analysis reveals reasons for these paradoxical patterns and makes predictions regarding productline bundling decisions for industries in Table 2 and beyond. In brief, there may be an optimal level of line differentiation. However, when the core differentiation is too low, having a product line may no longer be optimal because high-end buyers will buy the low-end product (i.e., price discrimination on quality becomes more difficult) and high-end product sales will suffer. Conversely, when the core differentiation is too high, the high-end product becomes very profitable, and the opportunity cost of maintaining the (very low quality) low-end for low-end buyers is too high. The optimal decision might be offering an intermediate quality to everyone. However, under these differentiation constraints, interestingly, firms can use ancillary services to optimize the product-line design because high-end bundling increases the line differentiation while lowend bundling reduces it. By bundling targeted ancillary (add-on) services at different ends, firms can achieve the optimal level of line differentiation.
Although we provide initial empirical support for our theory, our empirical analysis leaves many areas open to future research. First, we categorize firms based on whether they suffer differentiation constraints. Future research might use metric measures

for the degree of core differentiation providing specific managerial guidelines on how to design the cores. Second, we count the number of bundled ancillary products (as reported by the firms themselves) and categorize cores based on their product locality (prices). Future research might use metric measures for ancillary quality (whether bundled or not) and core (bundle) quality, examining how much ancillary quality (in a dollar amount) is needed to achieve the optimal line differentiation given a core differentiation. Last, unlike our categorical variables, the bundle quality may be endogenous since the bundled ancillary quality affects the bundle quality. Making these decisions endogenous in an empirical model awaits future research.

Acknowledgments The authors thank the McKethan­Matherly Foundation for funding. The authors thank the editor, area editor, reviewers, and the participants at the 2012 University of Maryland Frontiers Conference, the 2012 University of Texas at Dallas Frontiers Conference, and the 2015 Lehigh University Symposium for their valuable comments.

Appendix. Proofs We have already shown Lemma 1 in Section 2.2. Hence, now we will prove Propositions 1­3.

Proof of Proposition 1. From Lemma 1, given QL and QH ,

(QL , QH )

(

-

)QL

+ (

+

)QH

-

c

Q

2 L

-

c

Q

2 H

;

note

PL

QL and PH ( + )QH - QL. Under QH - QL  , the

optimal qualities are QL ( - )/(2c) and QHo QL + 

(because of

(Q

 L

,

QHo

)

< ( -

/c

and

Q

 L

)2/(4c) + (

+  < ( + )QHo -

+ )/(2c)).

c

Q

o2 H

.

From

Let o Lemma

1,

note, 1 2/(2c) and 2 ( + )2/(4c). Then, o < 1 

 < (2 - 2)/2; o < 2   <  - ( - )/(2c). Hence,

the single-product profits are greater than the product-line

profits if and only if    Similarly, given QH - QL 

- , where  min{ ¯, the single-product

2/2, QL }. profits are

greater than the product-line profits if and only if ¯   + ,

where  2/2. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 2­3. Under QH - QL  , consider four

possible cases: (1) BB: L H 0, (2) UB: L 1 and H 0,

(3) BU: L 0 and H 1, (4) UU: L H 1.

Case I. BB: L H 0.

Maximize

PBL

+ PBH

-

c

Q

2 BL

- cQB2 H

subject

to

PBL



QBL,

PBH  ( + )QBH , ( + )QBH - PBH  ( + )QBL - PBL, and

QH - QL  . From Lemma 1, BB  ( - )2/(4c) +

( + )2/(4c).

Case II. UB: L 1 and H 0.

Maximize

PL

-

c

Q

2 L

+ PBH

-

cQB2 H

+

pL

-

c q L2

subject

to

PL



QL, pL  a qL, PBH  ( + )QBH , ( + )QBH - PBH  ( + ) ·

QL - PL + a qL - pL, and QH - QL  . Given qualities, the

optimal prices are PL QL, pL a qL, and PBH ( + )

QBH - QL; thus, (QL , QBH , qL)

(

-

)QL

-

c

Q

2 L

+

(

+

)

QBH

-

cQB2 H

+

a

qL

-

c

q

2 L

.

The

optimal

product-line

qualities

are QL ( - )/(2c), qL a/(2c), and QBH ( + )/(2c).

The optimal profits are UB  + a2/(4c).

Case III. BU: L 0 and H 1.

Maximize

PBL

-

cQB2 L

+

PH

-

c Q H2

+

pH

-

c

q

2 H

subject

to

PBL  QBL, PH  ( + )QH , pH  a qH , ( + )QH - PH +

138

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

a qH - pH  ( + )QBL - PBL, and QH - QL  . Given qual-

ities, the optimal prices are PBL QBL and PH ( + ) ·

QH - QBL + a qH - pH ; thus, (QBL , QH , qH ) ( - )QBL -

cQB2 L + ( + )QH - cQH2 + a qH - cqH2 . The optimal product-

line qualities are QBL ( - )/(2c), QH QBL + , and

qH a/(2c). The optimal profits are BU ( - )2/(4c) +

(

+

)QH

-

c

Q

2 H

+

a2/(4c).

Case IV. UU: L H 1.

Maximize

PL

-

c

Q

2 L

+ PH

-

c Q H2

+

pL

-

c q L2

+

pH

-

c q H2

sub-

ject to PL  QL, pL  a qL, PH  ( + )QH , pH  a qH ,

( + )QH - PH + a qH - pH  ( + )QL - PL + a qL - pL, and

QH - QL  . Similarly, PL QL, pL a qL, and PH ( + )

QH + a qH - pH - QL. Then, (QL , QH , qL , qH ) ( - )

QL

-

c Q L2

+

(

+

)QH

-

c Q H2

+

a qL

-

c

q

2 L

+

a qH

-

cqH2 .

The

optimal product-line qualities and profits are QL ( - )/

(2c), QH QL + , and qL qH a/(2c); UU ( - )2/(4c) +

(

+

)QH

-

c

Q

2 H

+

a2/(2c).

Clearly, UB > BB and UB > BU; hence, the optimal

bundling strategy in the product line is UB or UU. We can

show that UB > UU if and only if  <  - , where  a/(2c). We only need to show that the product-line prof-
its are greater than the single-product profits. From Sec-

tion 3.2, note that the optimal single-product profits are

 max{U 1, U 2}, where U 1 2/(2c) + a2/(2c) and U 2 ( + )2/(4c) + a2/(4c). For  <  - a/(2c), UB is the optimal product-line profits, and UB >  (because of a < ). For  >  - a/(2c), UU is theoptimal product-line profits. Note, UU > U1   >  - 2/(2c). Since a < ,  >  - a/(2c) >  - 2/(2c); UU > U 1. Last, UU > U 2   >  - ( - )2 + a2/(2c). Since  >  - a/(2c) >  -
( - )2 + a2/(2c), UU > U 2. Therefore, UU > . We can similarly show Proposition 3. Q.E.D.

References
Acharyya R (1998) Monopoly and product quality: Separating or pooling menu? Econom. Lett. 61(2):187­194.
Adams WJ, Yellen JL (1976) Commodity bundling and the burden of monopoly. Quart. J. Econom. 90(3):475­498.
Anderson ET, Dana JD Jr (2009) When is price discrimination profitable? Management Sci. 55(6):980­989.
Anderson SP, Celik L (2015) Product line design. J. Econom. Theory 157(May):517­526.
Aydin G, Ryan JK (2000) Product line selection and pricing under the multinomial logit choice model. Proc. 2000 MSOM Conf., Ann Arbor, MI.
Balachander S, Ghosh B, Stock A (2010) Why bundle discounts can be a profitable alternative to competing on price promotions. Marketing Sci. 29(4):624­638.
Belloni A, Freund R, Selove M, Simester D (2008) Optimizing product line designs: Efficient methods and comparisons. Management Sci. 54(9):1544­1552.
Bitner MJ, Booms BH, Tetreault MS (1990) The service encounter: Diagnosing favorable and unfavorable incidents. J. Marketing 54(1):71­84.
Carey S (2011) Airlines to load on more fees. Wall Street Journal (March 7). http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405274870 4728004576176521453253668.
Chen Y, Riordan MH (2013) Profitability of product bundling. Internat. Econom. Rev. 54(1):35­57.
Coughlan AT (1987) Distribution channel choice in a market with complementary goods. Internat. J. Res. Marketing 4(2):85­97.

Desai PS (2001) Quality segmentation in spatial markets: When does cannibalization affect product line design? Marketing Sci. 20(3):265­283.
Dobson G, Kalish S (1988) Positioning and pricing a product line. Marketing Sci. 7(2):107­125.
Ellison G (2005) A model of add-on pricing. Quart. J. Econom. 120(2):585­637.
Fang H, Norman P (2006) To bundle or not to bundle. RAND J. Econom. 37(4):946­963.
Green P, Krieger AM (1985) Models and heuristics for product line selection. Marketing Sci. 4(1):1­19.
Hauser JR (2011) Comment: New developments in product-line optimization. Internat. J. Res. Marketing 28(1):26­27.
Hauser JR, Tellis GJ, Griffin A (2006) Research on innovation: A review and agenda for "Marketing Science." Marketing Sci. 25(6):687­717.
Johnson JP, Myatt DP (2003) Multiproduct quality competition: Fighting brands and product line pruning. Amer. Econom. Rev. 93(3):748­774.
Kalt JP, Zupan MA (1984) Capture and ideology in the economic theory of politics. Amer. Econom. Rev. 74(3):279­300.
Katz ML (1984) Firm-specific differentiation and competition among multiproduct firms. J. Bus. 57(1):S149­S166.
Kolay S, Shaffer G (2003) Bundling and menus of two-part tariffs. J. Indust. Econom. 51(3):383­403.
Kumar N, Radhakrishnan S, Rao RC (2010) Private label vendor selection in a supply chain: Quality and clientele effects. J. Retailing 86(2):148­158.
Lin S (2016) Add-on policies under vertical differentiation: Why do luxury hotels charge for Internet whereas economy hotels do not? Working paper, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong. http://ssrn.com/abstract 2609412.
McAfee RP, McMillan J, Whinston MD (1989) Multiproduct monopoly, commodity bundling, and correlation of values. Quart. J. Econom. 104(2):371­383.
McBride RD, Zufryden FS (1988) An integer programming approach to the optimal product line selection problem. Marketing Sci. 7(2):126­140.
Moorthy KS (1984) Market segmentation, self-selection, and product line design. Marketing Sci. 3(4):288­307.
Moorthy KS (1988) Product and price competition in a duopoly. Marketing Sci. 7(2):141­168.
Mussa M, Rosen S (1978) Monopoly and product quality. J. Econom. Theory 18(2):301­317.
Orhun AY (2009) Optimal product line design when consumers exhibit choice set-dependent preferences. Marketing Sci. 28(5): 868­886.
Rust RT, Chung TS (2006) Marketing models of service and relationships. Marketing Sci. 25(6):560­580.
Schmalensee R (1984) Gaussian demand and commodity bundling. J. Bus. 57(1):S211­S230.
Schmidt-Mohr U, Villas-Boas JM (2008) Competitive product lines with quality constraints. Quant. Marketing Econom. 6(1): 1­16.
Shugan SM (1989) Product assortment in a triopoly. Management Sci. 35(3):304­320.
Shugan SM, Kumar N (2012) Bundling strategy in a product line. Presentation, 2012 Frank M. Bass UT Dallas Frontiers of Research in Marketing Science, February 23, Dallas.
Shugan SM, Kumar N (2014) Bundling in product lines. Presentation, 2014 INFORMS Marketing Sci. Conf., June 13, Atlanta.
Shugan SM, Moon J (2015) Signaling with add-on bundles. Working paper, University of Florida, Gainesville.
Stigler GJ (1963) United States v. Loew's, Inc.: A note on block booking. Supreme Court Rev. 1963:152­157.
Subramaniam R, Venkatesh R (2009) Optimal bundling strategies in multiobject auctions of complements or substitutes. Marketing Sci. 28(2):264­273.
Toubia O, Hauser J, Garcia R (2007) Probabilistic polyhedral methods for adaptive choice-based conjoint analysis: Theory and application. Marketing Sci. 26(5):596­610.

Shugan et al.: Why Airlines Bundle High-End While Hotels Bundle Low-End Marketing Science 36(1), pp. 124­139, © 2017 INFORMS

139

Urban GL (1969) A mathematical modeling approach to product line decisions. J. Marketing Res. 6(1):40­47.
Villas-Boas JM (2004) Communication strategies and product line design. Marketing Sci. 23(3):304­316.
Wilson LO, Norton JA (1989) Optimal entry timing for a product line extension. Marketing Sci. 8(1):1­17.

Wittmer A, Boksberger P, Gerber A (2012) The future of ancillary service fees in air travel--An exploratory investigation of budget air travellers. Internat. J. Aviation Management 1(4):231­241.
Zhao H (2000) Raising awareness and signaling quality to uninformed consumers: A price-advertising model. Marketing Sci. 19(4):390­396.

