Vol. 34, No. 6, November­December 2015, pp. 864­881 ISSN 0732-2399 (print) ISSN 1526-548X (online)

http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2015.0914 © 2015 INFORMS

Robust New Product Pricing

Benjamin R. Handel
Department of Economics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, handel@berkeley.edu
Kanishka Misra
Ross School of Business, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104, kanishka@umich.edu
We study the pricing decision for a monopolist launching a new innovation. At the time of launch, we assume that the monopolist has incomplete information about the true demand curve. Despite the lack of objective information the firm must set a retail price to maximize total profits. To model this environment, we develop a novel two-period non-Bayesian framework where the monopolist sets the price in each period based only on a nonparametric set of all feasible demand curves. Optimal prices are dynamic as prices in any period allow the firm to learn about demand and improve future pricing decisions. Our main results show that the direction of dynamic introductory prices (versus static prices) depends on the type of heterogeneity in the market. We find that (1) when consumers have homogeneous preferences, introductory dynamic price is higher than the static price; (2) when consumers have heterogeneous preferences and the monopolist has no ex ante information, the introductory dynamic price is the same as the static price; and (3) when consumers have heterogeneous preferences and the monopolist has ex ante information, the introductory dynamic price is lower than the static price. Furthermore, the degree of this initial reduction increases with the amount of heterogeneity in the ex ante information.
Keywords: non-Bayesian learning; ambiguity; pricing; new products History: Received: August 2, 2013; accepted: January 30, 2015. Preyas Desai served as editor-in-chief and Yuxin
Chen served as associate editor for this article. Published online in Articles in Advance May 4, 2015.

A Bayesian analysis may be `rational' in the weak axiomatic sense, yet be terrible in a practical sense if an inappropriate prior distribution is used.
--Berger (1985) (Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis, p. 121)
1. Introduction
1.1. Overview Consider the pricing decision of a monopolist launching a new nonstorable product or technology with unit per-period demand. To understand the demand curve, the manager conducts market research. This research could be in the form of concept testing (Schwartz 1987), experiments (e.g., Green and Srinivasan 1978) or surveys (Dolan 1993) to assess consumer valuations. Such data provides the manager with some information about the underlying demand curve for their new product. However, it is unrealistic for the manager to have complete information about the demand curve at the time of launch (e.g., Lodish 1980, Besbes and Zeevi 2009, Kahn 2010, Harrison et al. 2012). In this paper we investigate how a monopolist should set new product prices with limited pre-launch information.
This question relates to a large literature that studies new product introduction. Most papers in this literature assume that firms have complete information

about the underlying demand curve (e.g., Robinson and Lakhani 1975, Wernerfelt 1986, Liu and Zhang 2013; please see the online appendix (available as supplemental material at http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/ mksc.2015.0914) for a more complete list of papers), and derive the optimal firm policy.1 Researchers have recognized that firms are uncertain about the underlying demand curve for new products (e.g., Rothschild 1974, Lodish 1980, Braden and Oren 1994, Desai et al. 2007, Bonatti 2011, Hitsch 2006, Biyalogorsky and Koenigsberg 2014; please see the online appendix for a more complete list of papers). However, in solving for optimal firm policy, these papers assume that the firm has a prior (represented as full knowledge or a prior distribution) over the uncertainty in the demand curve. For example, Desai et al. (2007) and Biyalogorsky and Koenigsberg (2014) assume that demand can be in one of two states and that firms know precisely the probability of each state. Alternatively, Braden and Oren (1994) and Hitsch (2006)
1 In this literature the dynamics in new product pricing can be optimal due to dynamics in demand (e.g., evolving consumer preferences and preference heterogeneity) or supply (e.g., inventory concerns and competition).

864

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

865

assume that firms have a prior over the possible uncertainty. With this information, the manager can use Bayesian decision theory to choose the policy that maximizes expected profits.
The practical reliability of a Bayesian decision theory analysis depends critically on prior assumption used (Manski 2005, Berger 1985). A critical input to new product pricing decisions is an accurate demand forecast. Survey studies that have tracked the accuracy of forecasts suggest very large forecasting errors for new products and technologies. Gartner and Thomas (1993) report new product forecast errors vary from -2 900% to +1 500% with a mean of -46 9%; and Kahn (2002) report a forecast accuracy of 40% for new to market products. This suggests that firms may not always have appropriate priors. The literature on judgment and decision making suggests that one reason for this is that managers may have behavioral biases when selecting priors for new products (Tyebjee 1987, Forlani et al. 2002, Bolton 2003, Bolton and Reed 2004, Schwartz and Cohen 2004, Lawrence et al. 2006). Kahn (2010, p. 184) summarizes "it is very unlikely that new-product forecasting will be free of all biases."
Motivated by the quote by Berger (1985) to start this paper, we develop and investigate a novel dynamic non-Bayesian pricing methodology. Despite the lack of objective information the firm must set a retail price to maximize total profits. To achieve this the retail price must (i) consider current profits, and (ii) allow the firm to learn about demand to extract higher profits in the future (Rothschild 1974, Grossman et al. 1977, Mirman et al. 1993). This is more generally labeled as learning by doing (Arrow 1962). Our framework is robust in the sense that the monopolist's price does not depend on subjective information. Instead, at each point in time the monopolist bases her pricing decision only on the set of all feasible demand curves.2 This kind of uncertainty is also known as Knightian uncertainty (Knight 2012) or ambiguity. Our proposed methodology suggests prices that can be used by firms who may be unwilling to make a prior assumption or, alternatively, that can provide managers with information about the implications of subjective assumptions on pricing decisions.
We present a two-period model where the monopolist prices to a unit mass of consumers. Within this framework, we assume that each consumer has unit demand with a constant product valuation over time. We consider two environments where consumers have homogeneous or heterogeneous preferences. We assume that, at the time of purchase, the
2 For example, if the information available to the firm is that 50% of consumer purchase at $5 and 10% purchase at $10, then any downward sloping demand curve that is consistent with these data is feasible.

monopolist does not have the information to price discriminate and set a single price in each period. For example, consider pricing at a retail store. These assumptions imply that consumers are nonstrategic in the sense that they do not have an incentive to misrepresent their valuation to obtain lower future prices. Of particular importance, if the monopolist has full information about consumer valuations, these demand assumptions would not predict dynamic prices. For the heterogeneous preference model, we make one additional distinction as to ex ante information available to the firm. We assume that firms have access to some known consumer characteristics (e.g., segmentation, location, age, or income) based on which they can group consumers. Furthermore, based on the prelaunch market research, firms have partial preference (i.e., ex ante) information for each group.3 Aggregating this information across groups of consumers allows the firm to partially identify the set of feasible demand curves (see Handel et al. 2013 for econometric identification and estimation methodology).
1.2. Robust Pricing To study the firm's pricing decisions under ambiguity we develop a novel dynamic non-Bayesian framework that simultaneously considers current profitability and the value of learning. The monopolist's objective function is to maximize aggregate profits. However, she only observes the set of all feasible demand curves. Without a subjective prior, the manager cannot integrate over this set to calculate the maximum expected profits. Instead, we assume that the monopolist selects a price in each period using dynamic minimax regret, a decision criterion that compares prices based strictly on the set of feasible demand curves. This dynamic decision rule is based on the minimax regret criterion (introduced by Wald 1950) and has been axiomatized by Milnor (1954) and Stoye (2011).4 We discuss alternatives to the dynamic minimax regret criterion in §3.2.4.
Minimax regret has been used to characterize robust decision making in a variety of social choice settings (see, e.g., Manski 2005) as well as in firm decisions (see Bergemann and Schlag 2008, 2011; Handel et al. 2013 in economics; Perakis and Roels 2010, Ball and Queyranne 2009, Besbes and Zeevi 2009, 2011 in operations). In the operations literature, Perakis and Roels (2010) find that the minimax regret approach
3 Our notion of observable ex ante heterogeneity permits a range of pricing environments. Specifically, if all consumers are individually identifiable our setting is equivalent to one in which the firm has panel data.
4 As summarized by Schlag (2006, p. 3) "Minimax Regret is the unique criterion that satisfies Ordering, Symmetry, Strong Domination, Continuity, Column Duplication, Convexity, INABA [IIA] and S [Strategic] Independence."

866

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

outperforms traditional heuristics used in the literature. Moreover, the notion of minimax regret is the foundational building block of popular computer science models such as multiarm bandit problems and machine learning (see Lai 1987, Bubeck and CesaBianchi 2012). Minimax regret centers around the notion of regret defined in our environment as the profits foregone by the monopolist from not charging the optimal price for the true demand curve. This notion of regret from the statistical decision literature (e.g., Savage 1951) is completely distinct from the notion of regret discussed in the psychology literature (Janis and Mann 1977). Specifically, in the absence of ambiguity, the objective function under minimax regret is exactly the same as the standard expected profit maximization.
Our research objective in dynamic robust pricing is similar to that considered in operations literature (Besbes and Zeevi 2009) and computer science literature (Kleinberg and Leighton 2003). Both areas consider a continuous time model where consumers enter with a random (Poisson) rate wherein firms can continuously change prices. The proposed solution in operations (Besbes and Zeevi 2009) is an algorithm with an experimental stage where the firm can learn about demand and then use minimax regret to select a price. Here the experimental stage is divorced from the profit stage, whereas in our set-up, we consider the potential profit from the learning stages. In the computer science literature, Kleinberg and Leighton (2003) propose a multiarm bandit solution (i.e., parametric approximations to the minimax regret problem) and show that such an algorithm will converge to the first-best solution in finite time.
1.3. Contributions To our knowledge, this is the first work on dynamic pricing from microeconomic foundations that accounts for both (i) setting prices without subjective Bayesian information, and (ii) learning about demand through pricing. Our main results show that the monopolist can offer a lower, unchanged or higher introductory price in a dynamic environment (as compared to a static environment) depending on the type of heterogeneity in the market. We find that (1) when consumers have homogeneous preferences, the introductory dynamic price is higher than the static price; (2) when consumers have heterogeneous preferences and the monopolist has no ex ante information, the introductory dynamic price is the same as the static price; and (3) when consumers have heterogeneous preferences and the monopolist has ex ante information, the introductory dynamic price is lower than the static price. Furthermore, the degree of this initial reduction increases with the amount of heterogeneity in the ex ante information. The difference in results

between the homogeneous and heterogeneous preference models is driven by the fact that the homogeneous preference model restricts the set of feasible demand functions to mass points. Here increasing initial price is attractive as consumer valuations must be above or below the higher price. If we increase price and consumers do not purchase, then reducing future prices significantly decreases future regret. In the heterogeneous preference model, this is not the case; a worst-case demand would have consumers with valuations above and below the first-period price. Moreover, under the worst-case demand consumers who do not purchase will have lower ex ante valuations than consumers who purchase. Here decreasing price allows the firm to bound the maximum regret from these ex ante lower value consumers and potentially target the ex ante higher valuation consumers with an increasing price in period 2. This result depends critically on ex ante information. When the firm has no ex ante information, lowering price is no longer valuable.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the static model of robust firm pricing. Section 3 presents our main results for the dynamic model of robust firm pricing. Section 4 summarizes this work, discusses its limitations, and suggests avenues for future research.
2. Static Monopoly Pricing Under Ambiguity
Before studying the monopolist's dynamic decision problem, we review the benchmark static model for monopoly pricing under ambiguity. This section closely follows the previous work of Bergemann and Schlag (2008) and Bergemann and Schlag (2011) on robust monopoly pricing without a subjective prior.5
We begin with an overview of minimax regret in a static setting. We then solve for the optimal static minimax regret prices in an environment where consumers are homogeneous in their valuations. We then consider a model where consumer preferences are heterogeneous. Here we will also allow for heterogeneity in ex ante information for the firm, whereby firms can have different ex ante partially identified preferences for consumers.
5 Bergemann and Schlag (2008, 2011) study a case wherein one consumer is drawn from any feasible probability distribution of consumers over a known support of potential valuations. The monopolist has no subjective information concerning the relative likelihood of these feasible distributions, and selects a random pricing rule to minimize her maximum expected regret over this space of uncertainty. We present a simplified version of this model, where the simplification results in a deterministic pricing rule.

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

867

2.1. Overview of Static Minimax Regret In a static setting where the monopolist knows that true distribution of consumer valuations F lies within a set of feasible demand curves , regret for any chosen price p is defined with respect to each F  as
R p F = First Best Profit F - Actual Profit p F
Under the First Best Profits, the firm has complete information and will charge each consumer her valuation.6 Regret here can be interpreted as the measure of the consumer surplus that the firm is unable to capture. For any p F this regret will result from overpricing (underpricing) corresponding to the consumers with valuations below (above) p. In the Bayesian set-up, this overpricing and underpricing for each p F pair is weighted by a subjective Bayesian prior over . Regret minimization with respect to this weighting is equivalent to expected profit maximization. With no Bayesian prior to weight the space of feasible demand curves, minimax regret evaluates each possible price by its maximum regret over the set . For any p, maximum regret occurs at a given Fwc p  where actual profits under p are farthest away from the first-best profits under Fwc p . Intuitively, maximum regret is the worst possible case of foregone profits over the set of feasible demand curves, given p. After maximum regret is determined for each price, the monopolist solves her problem by selecting the price that minimizes this maximum regret. Thus, minimax regret trades off losses from overpricing with losses from underpricing in a manner that is robust to subjective uncertainty over the set of feasible demand curves. Under the interpretation that regret represents the consumer surplus the firm is unable to capture (or lost consumer surplus), we can interpret the minimax regret price as that which minimizes the lost surplus for any distributions of valuations.
2.2. Model Setup and Key Informational Assumptions
In our model, we assume that the monopolist sets prices to maximize profits for a zero marginal cost product. In this section we discuss the information sets and decision variables we assume for consumers and the monopolist.
The monopolist faces a unit mass of consumers with unit per period demand. We assume that each consumer has a stable valuation vi which is known privately only to the consumer. In any purchase occasion, the consumer observes the price set by the firm p

and derives a utility ui = vi - p. She decides to purchase the good if ui  0 or equivalently if vi  p.
We assume that the firm conducts pre-launch market research that provides partial information about vi. In particular, the only information available to the firm is that vi lies between viL and viH , i.e., the firm knows viL and viH and has no prior information about the likelihoods of valuations in this range. In a related paper, Handel et al. (2013) provide an econometric framework that the monopolist can use to estimate viL and viH from pre-launch market research data. For notational convenience, we assume that viL = vL < viH /4 for all consumers.7 Therefore, the information available to the firm about consumer valuations can be summarized as vi  vL viH  i for every consumer i. The firm can aggregate these i across consumers to define the set of possible distribution of consumer valuations. We allow for fully nonparametric heterogeneity in preferences across consumers. For example, consider a case where the firm is facing two consumers (A and B) and knows vA  vL vAH and vB  vL vBH . The set of feasible aggregate valuations is defined as v1 v2 v1  vL vAH v2  vL vBH .
The type of uncertainty where the decision maker does not have information to place a subjective distribution over the support of possible outcomes is defined as ambiguity. Under ambiguity, it is impossible to calculate expected profits. Instead, the monopolist must make a decision based strictly on knowledge of the support of potential valuations. In this paper, we derive the optimal prices assuming that the firm will use the minimax regret criterion. Here, regret is a statistical characterization of the trade-off between potential losses from overpricing and potential losses from underpricing.
2.3. Static Minimax Regret with Homogeneous Preferences
In this section, we assume that all consumers are homogeneous in their preferences (valuations). Under this assumption, we can equivalently consider the monopolist selling to one representative consumer. The firm knows that the consumer has valuation v  vL vH but no prior information about the likelihoods of these different feasible valuations. The consumer knows her valuation, and will purchase the product if v  p.
In our framework, the monopolist trades off the losses from not making a sale with the losses from underpricing by choosing a price that minimizes her

6 Note that in the first-best solution we assume that the firm has complete information about F · and also that the firm observes the consumers' type at the point of purchase. Therefore under the first-best solution the firm does price discrimination.

7 Note that our results are robust to this assumption, which allows us to simplify notation (see Lemma 1). In our main results (see Lemmas 1 and 2, Theorems 1­3), we find that the optimal minimax regret price does not depend on vL.

868

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

maximum regret. The monopolist's regret is her firstbest profit, denoted as  given the resolution of ambiguity minus the profit actually earned in that scenario under the chosen minimax regret price. In our setting, the monopolist's first-best profit given true valuation v, is v. The actual profit earned, denoted by
p v is p, if v  p, and 0 otherwise. Thus, regret conditional on p and true valuation v is

R p v = v - p if v  p = v - p1 v  p

v

if v < p

If the monopolist sells the product at p, regret is how much more she could have earned if charging the consumer's true value. This is the regret of underpricing. If the monopolist does not sell the product, her regret equals the consumer's value v. The regret of overpricing is the difference between the zero profit she earned and the maximum amount that she could have earned. The monopolist trades off these two different types of losses by choosing p to minimize her maximum regret over the entire space of ambiguity. She solves the general problem

MMR = min max R p v p v vL vH
= min max v - p1 v  p p v vL vH
The following lemma restates the static optimal pricing rule found in Bergemann and Schlag (2011) under deterministic pricing:
Lemma 1. The monopolist's static minimax regret price is p = vH /2.
Proof. The regret from underpricing (v - p v  p) is maximized when v = vH . Therefore the maximum regret is vH - p. Whereas regret from overpricing (v v < p) is maximized8 at v = p - for  0. Therefore the maximum regret for overpricing is p. Thus, for a given p, the maximum regret, MR p = max vH - p p . Because vH - p is decreasing in p, this implies that minimax regret is attained when the regret from overpricing with that from underpricing are equal, i.e., when vH - p = p or p = vH /2.
Note. If we remove the assumption that vL  vH /4, then the monopolist's solution, p = max vH /2 vL .

2.4. Static Minimax Regret with Heterogeneous Preferences
The firm in this setting prices to a continuum of consumers, each of whom is known to have a valuation vi  vL viH . Define vH+ = max viH , or the highest upper bound across consumers. Define vH- = min viH to be the lowest upper bound across

8 Note that while this is labeled a maximum, this is more formally a supremum. We follow this convention for the remainder of the paper.

consumers. To simplify exposition, we assume that vH- > vH+/2. We also assume that the distribution of viH can be described by the continuously differentiable distribution G vH with bounded density g vH . Because we assume that the firm knows viH for every consumer i, it follows that the firm knows G vH perfectly.
We interpret the ex ante heterogeneity in preference bounds as arising from a situation wherein the monopolist has some demographic information to characterize the consumer population but only partial information about preferences conditional on known demographic information. We assume that at the time of purchase the firm cannot distinguish between consumers and therefore does not have the required information to price discriminate. To solve its pricing problem, the firm must contend with ambiguity over the set of feasible demand curves, which can be derived from knowledge about possible sets of valuations for each consumer. Each potential demand curve, F p describes the proportion of buyers who will buy the product at a given price, p. Each F p is a weakly decreasing function, mapping the space of feasible valuations to 0 1 . We define the set of feasible demand curves, , as the set of weakly decreasing functions that satisfy the following restrictions:

F p

 F p = 1 
F p 1-G p
F p = 0

if p < vL if vL  p  vH+ if p > vH+

The set , is the set of all possible true demand curves that the monopolist could be facing given her knowledge of the distribution of consumer valuation supports. For each price, p, as many as 1 - G p consumers could have actual values more than p, whereas it is possible for up to all consumers to have a value less than p so long as p > vL. The set is depicted in Figure 1.
Now, the monopolist chooses p to minimize her maximum regret relative to the set of feasible demand

Figure 1 (Color online) A Representation of the Set Feasible demand set 
vH + G(vH) defines max. demand
vH ­

P = Price charged

vL

0

0.5

1.0

q = Proportion of consumers who purchase

Note. The set of feasible demand curves ( ) is the set of all weakly downward sloping demand curves that lie in the blue region.

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

869

distributions. Define  F as the first-best profit, given complete information about F · . This equates to charging all consumers their valuations as follows:

vH +

F =

v dF v

vL

The monopolist's actual profit given price p and demand distribution F · is

p F = pF p

Thus, the monopolist's regret for charging price p with true demand F · is

Rp F = F - p F

vH +

=

v dF v - pF p

vL

For a given price, p^, we define the monopolist's worst case demand as the potential demand curve F ·  that will yield maximum regret. For each price p^ charged, a different F · can yield maximum possible regret, making worst case regret. More formally

Fwc p^ = arg max R p^ F
F ·
MR p^ = R p^ Fwc p^
The price that the monopolist chooses under ambiguity given the set of feasible demand curves solves the minimax regret problem

min max R p p

F

 min R p^ p^

Fwc p^

The monopolist's minimax regret problem is equivalent to the problem wherein the monopolist minimizes regret under Fwc p^ with respect to p^. Intuitively, for each possible price the monopolist could charge, she considers the worst case outcome conditional on that price within the set of feasible demand functions. The minimax regret price is the price that minimizes regret under its worst case demand. Given the constant lower bound vL for all i, Fwc p^ can be found using a threshold value assignment rule that depends on viH . Define vwc viH p^ as the worst-case valuation for specific consumer i given price p^. The following lemma shows 2(a) how we can determine vwc as a function of p, and 2(b) the solution to the monopolist's minimax regret problem minp MR p vwc :
Lemma 2. (a) For p^  vH-; Fwc p^ is composed from potential individual valuations using the cut-off rule:

vwc viH p^ =

p^ - viH

if viH < 2p^ if viH  2p^

(b) The monopolist's static regret minimizing price is med vH /2.
Proof. The proof is in the appendix.

3. Dynamic Monopoly Pricing Under Ambiguity
To study the monopolist's multiperiod pricing problem we use a dynamic version of minimax regret that extends the static criterion to account for the value of learning (see Hayashi 2011 for axiomatic foundations). We structure the learning dynamics assuming that the monopolist is forward-looking and nonBayesian. Specifically, the monopolist understands how her set of feasible demand curves could be narrowed in each period conditional on (i) the price that she charges, and (ii) the possible purchase quantities she could observe given that price.
In each period, the monopolist evaluates multiperiod regret by computing foregone profits over all remaining periods for a given price, feasible demand curve, and future price.9 The future price the monopolist considers depends on her decision-making dynamics. We structure decision-making dynamics with the assumption that the monopolist is sequentially rational. In our context, sequential rationality means that in each period the monopolist (i) dynamically minimizes maximum regret given her current information set, and (ii) knows that in all subsequent periods she will do the same.10 This assumption corresponds to the scenario wherein the monopolist's management team meets each period to determine current prices and cannot credibly commit to future prices.11 Thus, when the monopolist computes multiperiod maximum regret for a given current price, she endogenizes her future pricing behavior at each possible contingent information set. After computing multiperiod maximum regret in this way for each possible price, the monopolist selects the price that minimizes this object.
The dynamic minimax regret solution for an N period problem (or N period continuation problem) can be found recursively using backwards induction. In the final period, this criterion reduces to static minimax regret. In the two-period framework, the monopolist solves her static minimax regret pricing problem
9 Though the monopolist may learn over time that an initially feasible demand curve is not true demand, from the current perspective the regret calculation with respect to any feasible demand curve presumes that that curve is true demand and, as a result, does not need to consider removal of that demand function over time.
10 Sequential rationality in this single agent problem is similar to the concept of subgame perfection in dynamic multiplayer games.
11 If the firm commits to a full sequence of prices it will be unable to take advantage of its ability to learn as it will evaluate the entire sequence of prices with respect to only the initially available information. Specifically, it will minimize multiperiod maximum regret in period 1, but, in period 2, will be forcing itself to choose a potentially suboptimal price. As a result, we view the assumption that the firm does not commit, and acts in a sequentially rational manner, as an appropriate way to set up dynamic decision making and learning with the minimax regret criterion.

870

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

for all potential second-period information sets, and incorporates this information into her dynamic problem in the first period. We assume that there is no discount factor, i.e., both period profits are weighted equally in period one. The analytical challenge in analyzing this situation is that the worst-case distribution (i.e., the demand curve that causes the most regret) must be consistent with decision making in each time period.
We will start with the analysis of a homogeneous preference model and then consider the heterogeneous preference model.

3.1. Dynamic Minimax Regret with
Homogeneous Preferences
We introduce dynamic minimax regret in a twoperiod model wherein consumers have homogeneous preferences. Here we consider the monopolist selling to one representative consumer. The consumer's first-period purchase decision provides information to the monopolist that she will incorporate into her second-period pricing rule. As in the static problem, we assume at the beginning of the first period that the monopolist knows that the consumer has valuation v  vL vH . We denote the firm's first-period information set as 1. After the monopolist sets a first-period price, p1, she observes whether the consumer purchases, and updates her range of possible valuations. If the consumer purchases, the monopolist knows that the consumer's valuation must be at least p1. If the consumer does not purchase, the monopolist knows that the consumer's valuation is lower than p1. The monopolist's second-period information sets, 2, under these contingencies are

vL p1 2 = p1 vH

if v < p1 if v  p1

Once the monopolist has an updated information 2 at the beginning of the second period, she chooses the second-period price p2 2 that minimizes maximum regret as described in the static model in §2.3. In the first period the monopolist minimizes maximum regret over a state space composed of all possible valuations 1 and incorporates the way she will price in the second period conditional on the information set she must have at that point, contingent on v  1 and p1. For any given v  1 and price, p1, there is only one purchase history that could be consistent with v. In other words, if v is the true valuation the monopolist knows in the first period, then she knows the information set she will have in period two. The monopolist's multiperiod regret will be the difference between her ideal profit (twice the consumer's actual valuation) and her actual profit summed over both periods. However, the space of uncertainty with which

she is concerned in the first period will include only feasible second-period behavior/information if v is, in fact, the true valuation. More formally, the firm's multiperiod regret as a function of p1 and true valuation v is

R p1 v = 2v - p11 v  p1 - p2 2 p1 v 1 v  p2 2 p1 v

The ability to learn enters this formulation through
the ability of the monopolist to impact the second-
period information set with its choice of p1. When choosing p1 the monopolist considers the impact that this choice will have on 2, p2 2 , and on first-period regret. The sequential optimality assumption implies
that the monopolist cannot commit to p2 in period one but does know what she will choose in that period
conditional on her information set.
Maximum regret as a function of p1 is

MR p1

=

max R
v 1

p1

v

=

max
v 1

2v - p11

v  p1

- p2 2 p1 v 1 v  p2

2 p1 v

Given maximum regret conditional on p1, the monopolist selects the first-period price p1 that minimizes this maximum regret

p1 = arg min max R p1 v

p1

1

= arg min max 2v - p11 v  p1

p1

1

- p2 2 p1 v 1 v  p2

2 p1 v

Given this setting we can solve for the monopolist's optimal solution. Our main result is stated in Theorem 1, where we find that learning will lead the monopolist to increase her introductory price.

Theorem 1 (Higher Introductory Prices When

Consumers Have Homogeneous Preferences). The

monopolist facing consumers with homogeneous prefer-

ences will set a higher introductory price in a dynamic set-

ting relative to the static setting. p1 = 4vH /7 > p = vH /2;

with MR p1

= 6vH /7 =

6 7

MR

p

.

Proof. The proof is in the appendix.

When we make the model dynamic to incorporate the value of learning under ambiguity, in the one consumer model the monopolist always chooses a firstperiod price that is higher than the optimal price in the static model. If the consumer purchases, the price remains at the higher level in the second period; if the consumer does not purchase, the price is lowered. In the dynamic framework, the monopolist's minimax

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

regret

is

1 7

less

than

it

would

be

applying

static

mini-

max regret in a multiperiod setting, and incorporating

learning in both settings.

A firm lowering its initial price would want to price

in that direction only if information learned from the

consumer purchasing could later reduce regret com-

ing from high valuation consumers (otherwise aggre-

gate regret could not be lower than repeating the

static solution twice). However, in this case, lower-

ing initial price provides no information to change the

second-period regret. Consider the case wherein the

consumer has a valuation v = vH . If p1 < vH /2 then the consumer will purchase, and 2  p1 vH . By Lemma 1 p2 2 = p 1 = vH /2, the static minimax regret pricing rule. The regret in the second period

will be vH - p2 2 = vH /2. This is exactly the same as the static maximum regret.

Conversely, when the firm increases initial price, it

learns valuable information that it can use if the con-

sumer has a valuation just below the price charged.12

The ability to obtain this information gives the firm

flexibility to extract more of the profit if the consumer

has a high valuation. Because it knows if the con-

sumer has a low valuation, it can re-optimize in the

second period and significantly lower regret. In effect,

this is because there is less total value to be lost from

the consumer having a low valuation. Here the firm

can first try to extract profits assuming that the con-

sumer has a high valuation. If that fails, the firm can

lower the second-period price.

3.2. Dynamic Minimax Regret with
Heterogeneous Preferences
In this section, we extend the analysis to consider dynamic minimax regret to the case wherein consumers have heterogeneous preferences. Here each consumer's first-period purchase decision provides information to the monopolist that she will incorporate into her second-period pricing rule. As in the static problem, we assume at the beginning of the first period that the monopolist knows that each consumer, i, has valuation vi  vL viH . We define i1  vL viH as the identified set for consumer i in time period 1. We describe the first-period purchase decisions of each consumer with the binary variable bi = 1 vi  p1 . The monopolist's second-period information on each consumer, i2, is obtained by narrowing i1 for each consumer after the first period conditional on bi

i2 p1 bi 

vL p1 p1 viH

if bi = 0 if bi = 1

12 In the static case, the regret from overpricing is highest when the consumer's valuation is just below the price charged.

871

Once the monopolist has updated information i2 for each i, she determines the space of feasible demand
curves in period two and sets p2 as described in the static model of pricing under ambiguity. To derive
the set of feasible demand curves contingent on con-
sumer first-period purchase decisions, we introduce
some additional notation. Denote by q the proportion
of consumers that purchased the product in the first
period. Define G vH b = 1 as the distribution of valuation upper bounds in the second period conditional
on consumers having purchased in the first period.
For consumers that purchase, their (a) lower bound
of preferences will be p1, and (b) upper bound will remain the same in period two (when p1 < vH-, this will be true from the assumption that vH- > vH+/2). Because consumers with different viH are distinguishable from one another, the monopolist derives the dis-
tribution G · b = 1 as follows:

G vH

b=1 =

g vH
vH -

s

b=1

ds

q

A decision not to purchase the product in the first
period reduces the upper bound of feasible valuations
for consumer i from viH to p1, implying that G vH b = 0 is degenerate with all mass at value p1. The firm will maintain the lower bound of vL for these consumers. Using these properties, we derive the set of feasi-
ble second-period demand curves, 2, as the set of weakly decreasing functions satisfying the following
restrictions (shown in Figure 2):

2  F2 p

 F2 p = 1  F2 p  q 
F2 p = q
F2 p  q 1-G p b = 1  F2 p = 0

if p < vL if vL  p < p1 if p = p1 if p1 < p  vH+ if p > vH+

Figure 2

(Color online) A Representation of 2 Feasible demand set 2

vH + G(vH | b = 1) defines max. demand

P = Price charged

p1 vL

0

0.5

q

1.0

q = Proportion of consumers who purchase

Notes. The shaded region represents the space in which all downward sloping demand curves are feasible in period 2. Note that all demand curves must go through point p1 q , which is the exact price and quantity sold in period one.

872

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

In addition to describing the set of feasible demand
curves in the second period, note that 2 implicitly describes consumers' first-period purchase his-
tory. That is, knowledge of 2 implies knowledge of q and G vH b = 1 .
In the heterogeneous preference setting the struc-
ture of the second-period information set is different
from that in the static model. Therefore, with dynamic
consistency we solve this in two steps. In §3.2.1 we
study the second-period pricing problem conditional
on the information structure, 2, and use the results from that to study the first-period pricing problem
in §3.2.2, where we will derive our main results.
Before presenting our main results we add two reg-
ularity assumptions on the distribution G vH . These assumptions are conservative and ensure that there
are no sections of G vH where there is low density g vH relative to 1-G vH , similar to a monotone likelihood ratio assumption. These relationships for the
median of vH of truncated distributions of G vH hold for all standard distributions that occur on a bounded
interval G · (truncated normal, uniform, etc.). Con-
dition (I) states that the median of successive trunca-
tions of G does not change too quickly as q changes.
Condition (II) states that the median of successive
truncations of G does not change too quickly as the truncation threshold x changes.13

Assumption 1 (Median Regularity).

I

med vH

vH > Q1-q q

>

med -

vH

vH > Q1-q q

for q > 0

II med vH vH > x < 1 x

where Qx denotes the x quantile of G vH .

3.2.1. Second-Period Pricing. The second-period monopoly pricing problem is conceptually identical to the static pricing problem under ambiguity described in §2.4. However, learning from the prior period gives the space of feasible demand curves 2 a different structure in the second-period problem. We solve the monopolist's second-period problem considering the two cases of selecting p2 > p1 or p2  p1. This is a useful framework because, conditional on choosing p2 > p1, the monopolist essentially ignores consumers who did not purchase in the first period,

13 These two assumptions can be mapped directly into one another given a specified relationship between values and quantiles of G. Instead of unifying these assumptions with such a mapping, for exposition and clarity we state both. Last, while condition (II) states that the change in the median relative to changes in the truncation value cannot be too large in absolute value, condition (I) ensures that this derivative with respect to quantiles does not jump too quickly relative to the actual median normalized by the fraction of individuals purchasing.

as the maximum regret for consumers who did not
purchase in the first period will be p1, which does not depend on p2. Therefore the prices in the second period are set to minimize maximum second-
period regret among only consumers who purchased
in the first period. Conversely, if p2 < p1, the monopolist sells definitely to all first-period purchasers in the
second period. However the regret from first-period
purchasers increases relative to the first period as a
result of the reduced price. On the other hand, lower-
ing p2 can only reduce regret for consumers who did not purchase in the first period.
Lemma 3 describes the monopolist's second-period
solution, conditional on p2 being larger or smaller than p1. For each feasible 2 and corresponding q that could arise conditional on p1, the monopolist will choose p2 to minimize maximum regret across the restricted solutions described in Lemma 3. Specifi-
cally, if the minimax regret solution conditional on
p2 > p1 yields lower (higher) maximum regret than the solution conditional on p2  p1, the monopolist will choose the p2 and face the maximum regret in the solution restricting p2 > p1 (p2  p1). In the solution to the full model, we use these second-period solution
properties as input into finding the dynamic minimax
regret solution.

Lemma 3. (I) Conditional on selecting second-period
price, p2 > p1, the monopolist's second-period minimax regret price p2 and maximum regret given that price are

p2

=

med

vH 2

b=1

MR2 = 1 - q p1q p2G 2p2 b = 1

vH +

+

vH - p2 dG vH b = 1

2p2

(II) Conditional on selecting second-period price, p2  p1,
the monopolist's second-period minimax regret price p2 and maximum regret given that price are

 p1/2 
p2 =  p1/2 p1
p1

if q < 0 5 if q = 0 5 if q > 0 5

vH +

MR2 = 1 - q p2 +

vH - p2 dG vH b = 1 q

p1

3.2.2. First-Period Pricing. When setting a dynamic minimax regret first-period price, the monopolist knows what second-period price she will charge contingent on any information set 2. For each p1 the monopolist could charge, she knows which 2 are possible in the second period. Furthermore, the monopolist knows that the demand function F · is the same for both periods. This has two main implications for our solution. First, since the worst-case

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

873

demand function must be the same for both periods, the two periods need to be solved jointly. Second, when evaluating dynamic regret from a given F ·  1 for a specific p1, the monopolist knows exactly what consumer purchase decisions in the first period she will observe under this demand function.
The monopolist's first-period problem dynamic minimax regret problem is

min max 2 p1 F ·  1

-

1 p1 F

-

2 p2

2 p1 F

F

The monopolist's ideal profit 2  is still the single-

period first-best profit given known demand F ·

earned in each period. The first-period profit 1 depends on the first-period price and true F · . The

second-period profit 2 depends on the second-period price, set contingent on the information learned from

first-period purchase decisions, and true demand. The

monopolist minimizes maximum regret dynamically

by selecting the price that yields the lowest possible

maximum aggregate regret over all feasible demand

curves. The knowledge of how she will set the second-

period price impacts the multiperiod maximum regret

calculation for each first-period price. For instance, if

the monopolist sets a high initial price and nobody

purchases, she knows that she will respond by setting

a much lower price in the second period. Therefore

from a first-period perspective maximum multiperiod

regret from setting a high price may not come from

a feasible demand curve that leads to no consumers

initially purchasing because second-period maximum

regret will be low in this contingency.

To solve the monopolist's first-period dynamic min-

imax regret pricing problem, we need to determine

what feasible demand curve will yield the high-

est maximum regret for a given p1, conditional on sequentially optimal behavior in the second period.

We define worst-case demand in period t conditional

on pt

Fwc pt = arg max R pt F
F · t

In §3.2.1 we studied the monopolist's second-
period solution, which depends on Fwc p2 . Here, Fwc p2 is determined within the context of the secondperiod static minimax regret problem. In this sec-
tion, we characterize properties of Fwc p1 to find the dynamic minimax regret pricing solution p1. Determining Fwc p1 is much more challenging than Fwc p2 because it must account for the dynamic price and
outcome path engendered by p1, not just static outcomes. To analyze Fwc p1 we must know (i) Fwc p2 for each feasible 2 and p2, (ii) p2 conditional on each value of p1 1 F , and (iii) what the multiperiod maximum regret will be for p1 for each F · given the learning and second-period pricing that will occur.
Once we know Fwc p1 for each p1, the monopolist

selects the first-period price p1 that minimizes multiperiod maximum regret with respect to Fwc p1 . In §3.2.1 we discussed how to characterize (i) and (ii), while this section uses those results to address (iii) and characterize the dynamic minimax regret firstperiod solution.
We prove our main results in the following steps:
1. Characterize the worst-case demand function. We identify a subset of demand curves within 1 that could be worst case demand, conditional on p1. We consider the two cases p1 < p2 and p1  p2 separately and for each consider what could be the worst case demand functions. This step simplifies our problem by determining the effect of the two possible sequential minimax regret pricing rules on Fwc p1 . Restricting p2 relative to p1 allows us to narrow the space of feasible Fwc p1 to two demand curves conditional on p1, which we use to determine which p2 yields maximum regret. Specifically, here we establish that the worst-case demand curve does not have any weight on valuations (i.e., consumers) who purchase in only one period. Our result is formally characterized by the following claim:
Claim 1. (I) When p2 2 Fwc p1 p1 > p1, Fwc p1 does not contain consumers who purchase only in the first period. (II) When p2 2 Fwc p1 p1  p1, there exists Fwc p1 that does not contain consumers who purchase only in the second period.
Proof. The proof is in the online appendix.
2. Showing dynamic consistency. Using the results from §3.2.1, we show dynamic consistency along the dynamic minimax regret price path. This shows that, along the optimal price path, the monopolist prefers the same p2 (i.e., same pricing direction relative to p1) before and after learning the worst case demand in period one. Our result is formally characterized by the following lemma.
Lemma 4. Conditional on p1 and on 2 consistent with Fwc p1 occurring, along the dynamic minimax regret price path, the monopolist would choose p2 = p2 2 Fwc p1 p1 ex ante.
Proof. The proof is in the appendix.
3. Optimal pricing. We use these results as input into Theorem 2 where we solve for optimal first-period prices.
Theorem 2. When G is nondegenerate p1 < p, i.e., the monopolist will lower the introductory price in a dynamic setting relative to the static setting. Furthermore, for any
1, p2 2 Fwc p1 p1 > p1 along the dynamic minimax regret price, i.e., if a purchase history consistent with worst-case demand is observed, the monopolist will price upwards over time. When G is degenerate, p1 = p = p2 2 Fwc p1 p p1 .

874

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

Proof. The proof is in the appendix.
This result characterizes two important features of the monopolist's dynamic minimax regret pricing rule in a setting with arbitrary heterogeneity in preferences across consumers. First, the ability to learn about demand causes the monopolist to lower the introductory price relative to a static setting. Second, after the introductory price, if the worst possible partial realization of uncertainty occurs through learning from first-period purchases, the monopolist will increase her price in the second period.
Intuitively, both these results are true because of the way information obtained through first-period purchases impacts dynamic maximum regret in an environment with preference heterogeneity. For any p1, the monopolist's worst case demand will have some consumers who do not purchase with values just below p1, and some consumers who do purchase and have values equal to their maximum valuations. Crucially, under worst-case demand, consumers who do not purchase will have low vH relative to those who do purchase. Setting p2 > p1 allows the monopolist to establish low maximum regret levels from consumers who do not purchase over both periods (low vH ), which lets the monopolist then focus exclusively on minimizing maximum regret for high valuation consumers in the second period. Setting p2 < p1 does not similarly bound maximum regret from consumers who purchase. When the monopolist lowers price over time she can restrict the valuation of someone who purchases to above p1, but when lowering price deterministically increases maximum regret from this set of consumers by p1 - p2 for each consumer, this result depends critically on ex ante information heterogeneity. We have shown that lower initial prices are valuable when ex ante heterogeneity information exists in a dynamic setting with ambiguity and that the monopolist will decrease initial prices. However, where there is no ex ante heterogeneity information (G is degenerate), lowering initial prices is not valuable because there are no consumers with relatively low vH to target with a lower first-period price.
We derive a dynamic minimax regret result with uniform ex ante heterogeneity information in §§3.2.3­3.2.5.
3.2.3. Dynamic Pricing with Uniform Ex Ante Information Heterogeneity. We illustrate the solution to the heterogeneous preference model by explicitly solving the monopolist's dynamic minimax regret problem when pricing to a mass of consumers with heterogeneous preferences (vi). The firm has ex ante information to bound each consumer's preferences (vi  vL viH ). In this section we add the assumption that the distribution of vHi (G vH ) is uniform,

or G vH  U vH- vH+ . This form of demand ambiguity could arise in a setting wherein the monopolist observes a uniform distribution of an important demographic variable in its target population, and believes that the most someone could value their product is linked directly to that variable.
Given the result of Theorem 2, we know that the monopolist will charge a lower introductory price when consumers have heterogeneous preferences and that, under a first-period purchase history consistent with worst-case demand, the monopolist will choose a higher second-period price. The following theorem solves explicitly for the monopolist's solution:
Theorem 3. The dynamic minimax regret first-period pricing rule for the monopolist with uniform ex ante heterogeneity information is p1 = 23vH+ + 49vH- /144 < vH- + vH+ /4 = p. p2 2 Fwc p1 p p1 = 714vH+ + 294vH- /2 016 > pMMR.
Proof. The proof is in the appendix.
Corollary 1 describes how the extent of introductory price reduction relates to the degree of ex ante information heterogeneity in the population. We find as the distribution of ex ante information heterogeneity becomes more dispersed, the monopolist's introductory price decreases. Likewise, as the distribution of ex ante information heterogeneity becomes less disperse, the monopolist's introductory price increases. In the limiting case, as vH+ - vH-  0, we find p1  p from below. This is consistent with the ex ante homogenous case (no ex ante information, or G · is degenerate), where the first-period dynamic price (p1) is exactly equal to the static price (p) (see Theorem 2).
Corollary 1. For G ·  U vH- vH+ and G ·  U vH- - vH+ + , p1 1 G > p1 1 G for > 0.
Proof. Follows directly from
p1 = 23vH+ + 49vH- /144
3.2.4. Alternatives to Minimax Regret with Uniform Ex Ante Information Heterogeneity. An alternative to minimax regret in the decision theory literature is to use the maxmin criterion, or to set a price that maximizes the firm's minimum possible payoff over the range of possible valuations. Formally, pMM = arg maxp minF ·  p F . In our setting the maxmin price is set to vL for the static or dynamic first- and second-period cases. To see this, consider a distribution wherein all consumers are of type vL (a feasible distribution). Any price larger than vL will yield zero profit. Therefore the minimum profits for any price higher than vL is 0, whereas the minimum profits for a price vL is vL. We believe the maxmin criterion is less appealing that minimax regret in a dynamic pricing context for two reasons. First, maxmin focuses

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

only on the potential losses from not selling the product (i.e., overpricing) and does not consider the potential losses from foregone profits by selling at a price far lower than the consumer's valuation (i.e., underpricing). By contrast, minimax regret explicitly considers the trade-off between underpricing and overpricing. Second, unlike dynamic minimax regret, there is no price experimentation or learning with dynamic max min.
In §A.8 in the online appendix, we derive the optimal Bayesian price assuming an uninformative prior. Explicitly here the decision maker assumes, based on a subjective prior, that each consumer's valuations vi  U vL vHi . In a dynamic setting the Bayesian decision maker can update her information set based on the price charged (p) and the purchase decision of the consumer. If consumer i purchases at a price p, the monopolist will update her information to vi  U p vHi . If consumer i does not purchase at a price p, the monopolist will update her information to vi  U vL p . We derive the uninformative prior Bayesian price as

pB

=

1 2

vL

+

log

vH +

vH+ - vH- - vL - log vH-

- vL

We find that the optimal Bayesian price depends
on vL, vH+, and vH-, whereas the dynamic minimax regret price depends only on vH+ and vH-.14 Moreover, we show that pB/ vL < 0 (§A.8). Therefore if the firm obtains new data that increases vL for all consumers, the Bayesian price derived pB will decrease (until pB = vL). Consider the two time period pricing decisions for a decision maker using Bayesian updat-
ing. The implication here is that if the firm sets a price in the first time period (p1B) and all consumers purchase, the second-period price (p2B) will be equal to p1B. This is unlike the dynamic minimax regret solution where p2MMR will be higher than p1MMR if all consumers purchase in the first time period.
Next, we evaluate the implications of these decision
criterion for firm profits.

3.2.5. Numerical Example with Uniform Ex Ante Information Heterogeneity. We present a numerical example that illustrates the solution with uniform ex ante information heterogeneity. Consider a new product launch for a nonstorable good with considerable ambiguity. Assume that the monopolist knows that all consumers could have the same minimal value vL = 2 and that the highest possible valuations viH are distributed U 10 18 (vH- = 10, vH+ = 18). The static minimax regret price (pM MR), the first-period dynamic

14 One of the implications here is that adding heterogeneity in vL across consumers will impact the Bayesian price but not the mini-
max regret price.

875

minimax regret price (p1), the maxmin price (pMM), and Bayesian price with an uninformative prior (pB) are given below

pMMR

=

med 2

vH

=

vH +

+ 4

vH -

=

7

0

p1MMR

=

23vH+ + 49vH- 144

=6

3

pMM = vL = 2 0

pB

=

1 2

vL

+

log

vH +

vH+ - vH- - vL - log vH-

- vL

=6 8

To understand the profit implications of the mini-

max regret price, we simulate true preferences from

a parametric distribution and compute the resultant

firm profits. Of particular importance and consistent

with our model, we assume that the firm only knows

that vi  vL vHi , and that it does not know the distribution within this set. We generate consumers' true

valuations vi from a Beta distribution with parameters and between vL and vHi.15 We compare the profit
results for the following six prices: (1) static mini-

max regret price (pMMR = 7 0); (2) first-period dynamic

minimax regret price (p1MMR = 6 3); (3) second-period dynamic minimax regret price (p2MMR, derived numerically as a function of p1MMR and first-period purchase decisions); (4) maxmin price, wherein there is

a single solution for the static and both periods in

the dynamic model (pMM = 2 0); (5) static Bayesian

price assuming an uninformative prior (pB = 6 8); and

(6) second-period Bayesian updating with an unin-

formative prior (p2B derived numerically as a function of pB and first-period purchase decisions). We simu-

late outcomes for three sets of parameters ( and )

to see how the shape of the true preferences impacts

the resultant profits. For each set of parameters, we

simulate preferences for 500,000 consumers.

The results of the simulation are shown in Figure 3.

The rows of the figure represent the three simula-

tions (labeled A though C) with different param-

eter ( ) values to generate the true preferences

(vi  Beta

between vL and vHi).16 The first col-

umn of the figure plots the distribution of valuations

across the population. The second column plots the

prices charged based on the different pricing methods

described above. The third column plots the realized

profits. We will discuss the results for each simulation

in detail.

· In simulation A ( = 2, = 9), true preferences

are skewed to the left. In a static setting, the maxmin

15 We thank the associate editor for suggesting this simulation.
16 In addition to the simulations discussed below we added a simulation with U-shaped preferences ( = 0 5, = 0 5). The results are similar to the simulations shown here.

876

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

Figure 3

Simulation Experiment with the Following Setting vL = 2; vHi  U 10 18 ; vi  Beta

Distribution of valuations

Price charged

Between vL and vHi Realized profit

A: Alpha = 2 Beta = 9

7 6.3

6.8

3.1 2

3.5 0.3 0.6 2.3 2 0.4 2.2

MMR MMR MMR MaxMinBayes Bayes

MMR MMR MMR MaxMinBayes Bayes

0

5

10

15

20 static T1 T 2 all static T2

static T1 T2 all static T2

B: Alpha = 2 Beta = 2

7 6.3 6.3

6.8 6.8

2

4.2 4.3 4.3

4.2 4.2 2

0

5

10

15

20

MMR MMR MMR MaxMinBayes Bayes static T1 T2 all static T2

MMR MMR MMR MaxMinBayes Bayes static T1 T2 all static T2

C: Alpha = 9 Beta = 2

7

7

6.3

6.8 6.8

6.9 6.3 6.9

6.7 6.7

2

2

0

5

10

15

20

MMR MMR MMR MaxMinBayes Bayes static T1 T2 all static T2

MMR MMR MMR MaxMinBayes Bayes static T1 T2 all static T2

Notes. We consider three sets of parameters ( and ) labeled A through C. In each case, we simulate the true preferences for 500,000 consumers from the assumed distribution. The charts in the first column represent the true distribution of preferences for the simulation. The charts in the second and third columns represent the prices charged and the corresponding realized profits.

price (pMM = 2 0) ensures that all consumers pur-
chase and results in higher profits than both the minimax regret price (pMMR) and the uninformed Bayesian price (pB). In a dynamic setting, under minimax regret
the firm observes that only 9% of consumers purchase
in the first period and lowers the price in the second period (p2MMR = p1MMR/2 = 3 1, as in Lemma 3, part II under condition q < 0 5). We find that this results in
higher profits under the second-period dynamic min-
imax regret price than under the maxmin price. With
Bayesian updating, the firm will also lower the price in the second period (p2B). We find that the dynamic minimax regret prices result in higher profits than the
Bayesian updating prices in both time periods.
· In simulation B ( = 2, = 2), true preferences
are symmetric. In a static setting, both the minimax regret price (pMMR) and the uninformed Bayesian

price (pB) result in higher profits than the conservative maxmin price (pMM). In the dynamic setting, under
minimax regret the firm observes that 69% of con-
sumers purchase in the first period. Thus the firm will not change the price in the second period (p2MMR = p1MMR = 6 3, as in Lemma 3, part II under the condition q > 0 5). With Bayesian updating, the firm will also maintain the same price in the second period (p2B). We find that dynamic minimax regret prices and Bayesian
updating prices result in similar profits in both time
periods.
· In simulation C ( = 9, = 2), true preferences
are skewed to the right. In a static setting, the minimax regret price (pMMR) results in higher profits than the uninformed Bayesian price (pB) and the conservative maxmin price (pMM). In the dynamic set-
ting, under minimax regret, the firm observes that

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

877

nearly all consumers purchase in the first period. Thus the firm will increase the price in the second period (p2MMR = med vH b = 1 /2 = 7 0, as in Lemma 3, part I). This is unlike the case with Bayesian updating, where despite high demand, the firm will maintain the same price in the second period (p2B) (as discussed in §3.2.4). We find that the dynamic minimax regret second-period price results in higher profits than the Bayesian updating price.
In summary, these simulations highlight the way dynamic minimax regret helps the monopolist to learn about demand from the first period and to adjust prices in the second period. Furthermore, these simulations illustrate that the ability to learn results in comparable or higher second-period profits.
3.3. Summary of Results Overall our results suggest that the difference between the first-period dynamic price and the static price depends critically on consumer heterogeneity. The main results are characterized in Table 1. The results show that the role of learning information varies with heterogeneity in preferences and ex ante information heterogeneity. In a setting where all consumers have homogeneous preferences, the monopolist will set high period 1 prices (compared to the static model), and will lower the price in period 2 if consumers do not purchase. By contrast, in a setting with heterogeneity in preferences and ex ante information, the monopolist will set low period 1 prices (compared to the static model), and if the worst case demand is realized will then increase prices in period 2. The main difference lies in the fact that the homogeneous preference model restricts the set of feasible demand functions as mass points, which alters the intuition in the heterogeneous preference model. In the homogeneous consumers model, increasing the initial price is attractive as consumer valuations must be above or below the higher price. If we increase price and consumers do not purchase, then reducing future prices significantly decreases future regret. In the heterogeneous preference model, this would not be the case because worst-case demand would

Table 1 Main Results for Robust New Products Prices

Assumption about heterogeneity

Preferences

Ex ante information

Main result

Dynamic

Static p

p1

p2 (under Fwc)

No

vH 2

> p

p1

or

p1 2

Yes

No

med vH 2

= p

= p1

Yes

Yes

med vH 2

< p

> p1

have consumers with valuations above and below p1. Moreover, under the worst-case demand, consumers who do not purchase will have lower ex ante valuations than consumers who do purchase. Here decreasing price allows the firm to bound the maximum regret from these ex ante lower value consumers and to potentially target the ex ante higher valuation consumers with increasing prices in period 2. This result depends critically on ex ante information heterogeneity. When the firm does not have information about ex ante heterogeneity, lowering the price is no longer valuable.
4. Conclusion
This paper focuses on how monopolists will price when they face ambiguity about demand, but how they can reduce that ambiguity over time as they acquire information from consumer purchase decisions. The manager will make pricing decisions in a manner that optimally trades off information learned about demand with current profits in an environment. We show that incorporating learning causes the monopolist to reduce introductory prices and then to adaptively price based on the information that is learned. When the first-period purchase outcomes are as bad as possible from the monopolist's perspective, she will price upwards over time. We present a novel non-Bayesian framework for studying dynamic decision making. Marketers introducing new products face significant ambiguity when pricing. The current literature assumes that the manager uses a Bayesian prior to price in early periods. By contrast, we assert that the manager knows only that each consumer's valuation lies within a range of possible valuations and has no subjective information on which of these are more likely. An alternative view of our results is to understand the implications of subjective beliefs on pricing decisions.
Our main result shows that the monopolists can offer a lower, unchanged or higher introductory price in a dynamic environment (as compared to a static environment) depending on the type of heterogeneity in the market. We find that (1) When consumers have homogeneous preferences, introductory dynamic price is higher than the static price; (2) When consumers have heterogeneous preferences and the monopolist has no ex ante information, the introductory dynamic price is the same as the static price; and (3) When consumers have heterogeneous preferences and the monopolist has ex ante information, the introductory dynamic price is lower than the static price. Furthermore, the degree of this initial reduction increases with the amount of heterogeneity in the ex ante information. The extant literature shows that dynamics in pricing are optimal due to dynamics in demand (e.g., evolving preference) or supply

878

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

(e.g., inventory constraints). We add a demand learning objective for the firm that can also lead to dynamic optimal prices.
In this paper, we acknowledge that we study a stylized problem with three main limitations. First, while we study a monopoly pricing problem, situations where pricing under ambiguity is relevant might involve multiple firms pricing strategically. Second, our model incorporates firm-side learning, while consumer valuations are static over time. In new product settings, consumers might also exhibit preference formation or learning (e.g., Erdem and Keane 1996). Third, we are restricted to nonstorable goods. Considering storable goods, future research might focus on goods where consumers have incentives to stockpile (Hendel and Nevo 2006) and goods (e.g., technology) where firms might consider temporal price discrimination (e.g., Nair 2007).
Whereas the focus of our paper is pricing, the framework presented here can be applied to other marketing mix instruments (e.g., advertising). In many settings, marketers have incomplete information about consumer preferences and responses to marketing mix instruments. Formally analyzing decisions under ambiguity provides an alternative for managers unwilling to make subjective prior assumptions. We hope future empirical and analytical marketing research will explore robust marketing mix decisions.
Supplemental Material Supplemental material to this paper is available at http://dx .doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2015.0914.
Acknowledgments The authors thank Charles Manski for his advice and support on this project. This research has also benefited from the extensive comments of Igal Hendel, Michael Whinston, Guy Arie, Jeff Ely, Jose Espin, Daniel Garrett, Paul Grieco, Garrett Johnson, Ralf Meisenzahl, Mallesh Pai, James Roberts, and S. Sriram, seminar participants at Northwestern University, the University of Michigan, University of California, San Diego, and the University of Rochester.
Appendix
A.1. Proof of Lemma 2
Proof. Sketch of the proof provided here. See the online appendix for the complete proof.
First, consider the regret from prices p < vH-. As in the representative consumer model, consider the regret from overpricing and underpricing for each consumer. The regret from overpricing is maximized by solving maxv v, subject to v < p, which is solved at v = p - for  0. The regret from underpricing is maximized by solving maxv v - p , subject to v > p, which is solved at v = viH . The first kind of regret is greater than the second if p^ - > viH - p^ or 2p^ > viH + (  0). This gives the worst-case

valuations for each consumer. In our model, we allow for full nonparametric heterogeneity in true valuations across consumers. Therefore, Fwc p^ can be found by aggregating the worst-case valuations for each consumer.
The monopolist's maximum regret for each price is

vH +

MR p^ = p^G 2p^ +

vH dG vH - p^ 1 - G 2p^

2p^



p

=

med vH 2

In the online appendix we show that the regret from p = med vH /2 is lower than the regret from p  vH-.

A.2. Proof of Theorem 1

Proof. Sketch of the proof provided here. See the online

appendix for the complete proof.

We begin by proving in the following steps:

1. The monopolist's optimal first-period price p1  vH /2. We show that p1 = vH /2 has lower regret than any p1 < vH /2.
The intuition for this result is as follows: The static maxi-

mum regret from charging a price is vH /2, therefore maxi-

mum multiperiod regret from charging p1 = p2 = vH /2 is vH .

If p1 < vH /2, maximum regret occurs when the consumer

has valuation vH . Here, regret in the first period is vH - p1

and regret in the second period is vH - vH /2 (by Lemma 1).

Therefore

the

multiperiod

regret

is

3 2

vH

- p1 > vH .

2. Given that p1  vH /2, the maximum regret under a

minimax regret first-period price rule for the monopolist,

conditional on a first-period purchase is equal to 2 vH - p1 . When the consumer does not purchase, maximum regret

equals 3p1/2. 3. Because dynamic maximum regret conditional on

no first-period purchase is increasing in p1 and dynamic maximum regret conditional on a first-period purchase is

decreasing in p1, actual dynamic minimax regret is achieved by setting p1 to where these two quantities are equal. Given the results of the previous claims, this occurs when

3 2 p1 = 2 vH - p1



p1

=

4vH 7

The dynamic minimax regret value, given this optimal pric-

ing rule, equals 2 vH - p1 = 6vH /7, which occurs when the

consumer has true valuation of vH or 4vH /7 -

.

This

is

6 7

of

what maximum regret would be if naively applying static

minimax regret twice (MR p = vH ).

A.3. Proof of Lemma 3

Proof. Sketch of the proof provided here. See the online

appendix for the complete proof.

For notational convenience we partition 2 into sets of

feasible demand curves conditional on whether (

P 2

)

or

(

NP 2

)

a

consumer

purchased

the

product

in

the

first

period

(see the online appendix for the mathematical formulation).

If p2 > p1, then maximum regret for the proportion 1 - q of the population that did not purchase in the first period

is fixed for any p2 and equal to 1 - q p1. As a result, the monopolist only considers feasible demand curves for the

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

879

population that purchased in the first period when selecting

a second-period price. The monopolist's problem is equiv-

alent to the static pricing problem with heterogeneity as

described in §2 with

P 2

as

the

state

space.

The

solution

to Lemma 2 then applies to this setting, implying p2 =

med vH b = 1 /2. Maximum regret for the second period as

a function of p2 is the fixed maximum regret for those con-

sumers who did not purchase in the first period 1 - q p1,

plus the maximum regret for the static problem with het-

erogeneity, given

P 2

,

weighted

by

q.

If p2 < p1, then maximum regret for the proportion q of

the population that did purchase will be E vH b = 1 - p2

because the monopolist knows that each consumer who

bought in the first period will buy in the second period

and maximum regret for each such buyers occurs when

their valuation is as high as possible. Thus, the monopolist's

maximum population

regret

is

vH p1

restricting p2 + vH - p2 dG

< p1 vH b

for =1

this portion of the q. The monopolist

solves the second-period minimax regret problem consider-

ing

NP 2

along

with

the

additional

maximum

regret

for

the

high value consumers as a function of p2.

If q > 0 5, then p2 = p1: Lowering price will increase max-

imum regret to high value consumers by q p2 whereas the

change in price can only decrease maximum regret for low

value consumers by 1 - q p2. If q < 0 5, then lowering p2 decreases maximum regret to low value consumers by q p2 until p2 = p1/2, after which lowering p2 has no additional impact on lowering maximum regret because all low value

consumers could have value p1 - . Because 1 - q p2 > q p2 for q < 0 5, p2 = p1/2. If q = 0 5 then 1 - q p2 = q p2 and any price in between p1/2 and p1 minimizes maximum regret for p2  p1. The formula for maximum regret follows.

A.4. Proof of Claim 1 See the online appendix for the proof.
A.5. Proof of Lemma 4
Proof.17 Sketch of the proof provided here. See the online appendix for the complete proof.
Consider the multiperiod regret
R p1 p2 Fwc p1 p q
= R p1 Fwc p1 p q + R p2 Fwc p1 p q
Conditional on p1 and qwc p1 occurring, R p1 Fwc p1 p q is independent of p2. Then, picking the p2 that minimizes maximum R p2 Fwc p1 p q conditional on q, p1, and purchase history consistent with Fwc p1 p q is identical to picking p2 to minimize maximum R p1 p2 Fwc p1 p q ex ante.

A.6. Proof of Theorem 2
Proof. Outline of the main steps and results of the proof provided here. See the online appendix for the complete proof.

17 Note in the proofs that we use Fwc p1 p and Fwc p1 interchangeably. This represents the worst-case demand curve under a
price p1 evaluated at all prices p.

The first five steps focus on the case wherein G is nondegenerate, whereas step 6 focuses on the degenerate case.
Step 1. Determining Fwc p1 p q . This allows us to determine the maximum regret from upward or downward pricing in the second period. We derive

MR p1 p2U q = 2p1 1-q + 2E vH vH > Q1-q -p1 -p2U q

MR

p1

p2D

q

3p1 =2

1-q +

2E

vH

vH > Q1-q

3p1 -2

q

Step 2. Pricing direction over time given q and p1. Define q as the q such that MR p1 p2D q = MR p1 p2U q . We find that  q > q, MR p1 p2U q < MR p1 p2D q or the monopolist will increase price in the second time period; and  q < q, MR p1 p2U q > MR p1 p2D q or the monopolist will increase price in the second time period.
Step 3. MR p1 p2D q is increasing over the range 0 q for each p1. We show that for any p1 the maximum regret over the range 0 q , where the monopolist will price down-
wards over time under worst case demand (see Step 2), will
occur at q Step 4.  q > q such that MR p1 p2U q > MR p1 p2U q ,
implying that p1 < p2 2 Fwc p1 p p1 along the dynamic minimax regret price. We show that  q > q such that MR p1 p2U q > MR p1 p2U q = MR p1 p2D q . This will imply that under the dynamic minimax regret first-period
solution p1, p2 2 Fwc p1 p p1 > p1, i.e., the monopolist will always price upwards when a purchase history consis-
tent with Fwc p1 p is observed in period one. Step 5. p1 < p, The monopolist price experiments downward.
Given the result in Step 4, we find that the ability to learn
by increasing the price in the second-period results in a
monopolist decreasing price in the first period.
Step 6. When G is degenerate,

p1 = p = p2 2 Fwc p1 p p1
This shows that our result depends critically on ex ante heterogeneity. In the absence of ex ante heterogeneity the firm will not price experiment.

A.7. Proof of Theorem 3

Proof. Sketch of the proof provided here. See the online appendix for the complete proof.
Claim 1 implies that under worst-case demand for dynamic minimax regret price p1 there will be two groups of consumers, those who purchase the product in both periods and those who never purchase. The threshold to determine who buys and who does not in the first period under worst case demand for a given p1 solves

vH = 3p1 + p2

2
2

1 p1

12p1 + vH+

=

7

(1)

This implies that the maximum regret conditional on a given first-period price p1 is

MR p1

·

144p12/7 - 46p1vH+/7 - 14p1vH-

=

7 vH+ - vH-

880

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

The first-period dynamic minimax regret price can then be determined by solving

min p1MR p1



p1

=

23vH+ + 49vH- 144

Because vH+ > vH- 23vH++49vH- /144 < vH-+vH+ /4=p.
p2 2 Fwc p1 p p1 can be found by inserting the value of vH determined as a function of p1 into the formula for contingently optimal pricing under Lemma 3

vH

=

12p1

+ vH+ 7

=

420vH + 1

+ 588vH - 008

p2

2 Fwc p1 p

p1

=

vH+ + vH 4

=

714vH + + 294vH - 2 016

> p

A.8. Analysis of a Uninformed Bayesian Decision
Maker with Uniform Ex Ante Heterogeneity In this section, we consider the model with uniform ex ante heterogeneity, or vHi  U vH- vH+ . We derive the optimal Bayesian price assuming an uninformative prior. Explicitly here the decision maker assumes, based on a subjective prior, that each consumer's valuations vi  U vL vHi . The lemma below derives the optimal Bayesian price assuming an uninformed prior.

Lemma. If the monopolist assumes a flat subjective uniform prior for each consumer i between vL viH , the optimal price that maximizes expected profits for the heterogeneous consumers model is given by

pB =

1 2 vL

+

log

vH +

vH + - vL

- vH- - log vH-

- vL

Proof. Sketch of the proof provided here. See the online

appendix for the complete proof.

B=

vH + vH -

vH vH

-p - vL

p

dvH

The first order conditions give us

2p

vH +

1

vH- vH - vL dvH =

vH + vH -

vH vH - vL

dvH



1 p= 2

vL

+

log

vH + vH+ - vL

- vH- - log vH- - vL

Corollary. In the heterogeneous consumer model, the optimal Bayesian solution is strictly decreasing in vL, or pB/ vL < 0.
Proof. See the online appendix for the proof.

References
Arrow KJ (1962) The economic implications of learning by doing. Rev. Econom. Stud. 29(3):155­173.
Ball MO, Queyranne M (2009) Toward robust revenue management: Competitive analysis of online booking. Oper. Res. 57(4):950­963.
Bergemann D, Schlag K (2008) Pricing without priors. J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 6(2­3):560­569.
Bergemann D, Schlag K (2011) Robust monopoly pricing. J. Econom. Theory 146(6):2527­2543.
Berger JO (1985) Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis (Springer-Verlag, New York).

Besbes O, Zeevi A (2009) Dynamic pricing without knowing the demand function: Risk bounds and near-optimal algorithms. Oper. Res. 57(6):1407­1420.
Besbes O, Zeevi A (2011) On the minimax complexity of pricing in a changing environment. Oper. Res. 59(1):66­79.
Biyalogorsky E, Koenigsberg O (2014) The design and introduction of product lines when consumer valuations are uncertain. Production Oper. Management 23(9):1539­1548.
Bolton LE (2003) Stickier priors: The effects of nonanalytic versus analytic thinking in new product forecasting. J. Marketing Res. 40(1):65­79.
Bolton LE, Reed A (2004) Sticky priors: The perseverance of identity effects on judgment. J. Marketing Res. 41(4):397­410.
Bonatti A (2011) Menu pricing and learning. Amer. Econom. J.: Microeconomics 3(3):124­163.
Braden DJ, Oren SS (1994) Nonlinear pricing to produce information. Marketing Sci. 13(3):310­326.
Bubeck S, Cesa-Bianchi N (2012) Regret analysis of stochastic and nonstochastic multi-armed bandit problems. Foundations Trends Machine Learn. 5(1):1­122.
Desai PS, Koenigsberg O, Purohit D (2007) The role of production lead time and demand uncertainty in marketing durable goods. Management Sci. 53(1):150­158.
Dolan RJ (1993) Managing the New Product Development Process (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA).
Erdem T, Keane MP (1996) Decision-making under uncertainty: Capturing dynamic brand choice processes in turbulent consumer goods markets. Marketing Sci. 15(1):1­20.
Forlani D, Mullins JW, Walker OC (2002) New product decision making: How chance and size of loss influence what marketing managers see and do. Psych. Marketing 19(11):957­981.
Gartner WB, Thomas RJ (1993) Factors affecting new product forecasting accuracy in new firms. J. Product Innovation Management 10(1):35­52.
Green PE, Srinivasan V (1978) Conjoint analysis in consumer research: Issues and outlook. J. Consumer Res. 5(2):103­123.
Grossman S, Kihlstrom R, Mirman L (1977) A Bayesian approach to the production of information and learning by doing. Rev. Econom. Stud. 44(3):533­547.
Handel B, Misra K, Roberts J (2013) Robust firm pricing with panel data. J. Econometrics 174(2):165­185.
Harrison JM, Keskin NB, Zeevi A (2012) Bayesian dynamic pricing policies: Learning and earning under a binary prior distribution. Management Sci. 58(3):570­586.
Hayashi T (2011) Context dependence and consistency in dynamic choice under uncertainty: The case of anticipated regret. Theory Decision 70(4):399­430.
Hendel I, Nevo A (2006) Measuring the implications of sales and consumer inventory behavior. Econometrica 74(6):1637­1673.
Hitsch G (2006) Optimal dynamic product launch and exit under demand uncertainty. Marketing Sci. 25(1):25­30.
Janis IL, Mann L (1977) Decision Making: A Psychological Analysis of Conflict, Choice, and Commitment (Free Press, New York).
Kahn KB (2002) An exploratory investigation of new product forecasting practices. J. Product Innovation Management 19(2): 133­143.
Kahn KB (2010) New-Product Forecasting (John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ).
Kleinberg R, Leighton FT (2003) The value of knowing a demand curve: Bounds on regret for on-line posted-price auctions. Proc. 44th IEEE Sympos. Foundations Comput. Sci. (FOCS), 594­605.
Knight FH (2012) Risk, Uncertainty and Profit Reprint, Original 1921 (Courier Dover Publications, Mineola, NY).
Lai TL (1987) Adaptive treatment allocation and the multi-armed bandit problem. Ann. Statist. 15(3):1091­1114.
Lawrence M, Goodwin P, O'Connor M, Önkal D (2006) Judgmental forecasting: A review of progress over the last 25 years. Internat. J. Forecasting 22(3):493­518.
Liu Q, Zhang D (2013) Dynamic pricing competition with strategic customers under vertical product differentiation. Management Sci. 59(1):84­101.

Handel and Misra: Robust New Product Pricing Marketing Science 34(6), pp. 864­881, © 2015 INFORMS

881

Lodish LM (1980) Applied dynamic pricing and production models with specific application to broadcast spot pricing. J. Marketing Res. 17(2):203­211.
Manski C (2005) Social Choice with Partial Knowledge of Treatment Response (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Milnor J (1954) Games against nature. Thrall RM, Coombs CH, Davis RL, eds. Decision Processes (John Wiley, New York), 49­59.
Mirman L, Samuelson L, Urbano A (1993) Monopoly experimentation. Internat. Econom. Rev. 34(3):549­563.
Nair H (2007) Intertemporal price discrimination with forwardlooking consumers: Application to the US market for console video-games. Quant. Marketing Econom. 5(3):239­292.
Perakis G, Roels G (2010) Robust controls for network revenue management. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 12(1): 56­76.
Robinson B, Lakhani C (1975) Dynamic price models for newproduct planning. Management Sci. 21(10):1113­1122.

Rothschild M (1974) A two-armed bandit theory of market pricing.
J. Econom. Theory 9(2):185­202. Savage LJ (1951) The theory of statistical decision. J. Amer. Statist.
Assoc. 46(253):55­67. Schlag K (2006) Why minimax regret? Accessed April 20, 2015,
http://homepage.univie.ac.at/karl.schlag/research/learning/
whyMR.pdf. Schwartz D (1987) Concept Testing: How to Test New Product Ideas
Before You Go To Market (AMACOM, New York). Schwartz Z, Cohen E (2004) Hotel revenue-management forecast-
ing: Evidence of expert-judgment bias. Cornell Hotel Restaurant
Admin. Quart. 45(1):85­98. Stoye J (2011) Axioms for minimax regret choice correspondences.
J. Econom. Theory 146(11):2226­2251. Tyebjee TT (1987) Behavioral biases in new product forecasting.
Internat. J. Forecasting 3(3):393­404. Wald A (1950) Statistical Decision Functions (John Wiley, New York). Wernerfelt B (1986) A special case of dynamic pricing policy. Man-
agement Sci. 32(12):1562­1566.

