http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/mksc

MARKETING SCIENCE
Vol. 40, No. 2, March­April 2021, pp. 325­343 ISSN 0732-2399 (print), ISSN 1526-548X (online)

Entry of Platforms into Complementary Hardware Access Product Markets

Siddhartha Sharma,a Amit Mehrab
a Kelley School of Business, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405; b Naveen Jindal School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas 75080 Contact: sishar@iu.edu, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6274-4086 (SS); amit.mehra@utdallas.edu,
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3822-9543 (AM)

Received: June 8, 2017 Revised: September 13, 2018; August 29, 2019; April 7, 2020 Accepted: May 15, 2020 Published Online in Articles in Advance: October 8, 2020
https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2020.1249
Copyright: © 2020 INFORMS

Abstract. Access to a platform's services often requires consumers to use a complementary
hardware product or service, for example, internet service is needed to access the YouTube platform. Typically, such access products are provided by third-party firms. More recently,
however, some major platforms such as Google have themselves ventured into providing these access products. For example, Google Fiber provides access to YouTube. In this paper, we examine the effect of a platform's entry into an access product market when the profits from the platform's advertising business depend upon the quality of the access products. We develop a theoretical model to study this context and find that such an entry
by the platform (i) can lead the platform to provide a higher quality access product than the third-party firms at a lower price, (ii) may, in contrast to the entry by a third-party firm, lead to a higher quality access product by both the platform as well as the firms, (iii) improves the platform's profits because of increased advertising revenue and/or additional profits from the access product sales, and (iv) increases consumer surplus even though the platform becomes more dominant because of its entry into the access product market. All the results are driven by the positive association between the platform's advertising profits and the quality of access products in the market.

History: Yuxin Chen served as the senior editor and Greg Shaffer served as associate editor for this article.

Keywords: two-sided markets · advertising · envelopment · quality competition · price competition · spokes model · vertical integration

1. Introduction
The business model of two-sided platforms is based on creating an efficient way to match consumers with suppliers. These platforms typically expand the boundaries of their business by offering products and services to the consumers just like the supply side of the platform (Hagiu and Spulber 2013, Lee 2013). For example, Microsoft's Xbox platform expanded its business by publishing its own video games, such as Halo. Another way for platforms to expand their business is to focus on the consumer side rather than the supply side. Consumers often require a complementary hardware product or service to access the services provided by a platform (see Figure 1), and we refer to these products/services as access products. As an example, consider a smartphone or an internet service that is required to access the supply side of digital content platforms, such as YouTube, Google Search, etc.
Many two-sided platforms have entered into the business of selling access products even when established third-party firms existed to provide such products. For instance, Google, which owns YouTube, entered into the business of internet service provision

through Google Fiber although big internet service providers (ISPs), such as Comcast and Charter, existed. Similarly, an increasing number of consumers access Google's content and search platforms through their smartphones. Google entered into the smartphone business with its Pixel phones though other Android phones, for example, Samsung Galaxy, already existed. Besides Google, Facebook has also adopted this approach. Virtual reality (VR) headsets are becoming popular for accessing Facebook because the value of social interactions are higher when people access the platform in a setting with virtual and augmented reality (Turk 2017). Facebook entered this access device market through its Oculus product alongside other VR headsets, such as HTC Vive and PlayStation VR.
In this paper, we investigate why platforms expand their business by providing access products. Clearly, entering into the access product market creates a new revenue stream for the platform. In addition, the platform can enter with a relatively higher quality access product that can increase the platform's revenues. For example, consider YouTube. A higher quality internet service allows consumers to enjoy a better

325

326

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

Figure 1. Role of Access Product or Service for a Platform
quality video streaming experience on YouTube. This induces consumers to consume more content on YouTube, thus allowing YouTube to show more ads to consumers and earn more advertising revenue (Gabbert 2017). Similarly, a better quality phone may allow consumers to search quickly and efficiently, inducing them to search more, which helps the Google Search platform in improving its advertising earnings.
However, a platform's entry increases competition in the access product market, and this increase in competition may influence an increase or a decrease in the qualities of competing access products. An increase in the quality of other access products benefits the platform as it earns higher advertising revenues from consumers who use these products. However, a reduction in the quality of other access products decreases the platform's earnings from consumers who utilize these products.
There has been an intense debate in previous literature since Schumpeter (1942) on the relationship between competition and innovation, and we know that, depending on the context, an increase in competition may increase or decrease innovation. We are interested in the context of mature markets in which the market is covered because this is the situation in many access products, such as smartphones and ISPs. In this context, we expect that entry reduces incentives to innovate for existing firms (Banker et al. 1998, Vives 2008, Goettler and Gordon 2011). Thus, one may suspect that entry of platforms in access

product markets would reduce qualities of other access products.
Anecdotal evidence, however, suggests the opposite. For example, postentry of Google Fiber, existing ISPs improved their quality by investing in their infrastructure to provide better internet speeds (Davidson 2015, Levin and Downes 2018). Thus, entry of twosided platforms into access product markets presents a puzzle, and we wish to understand why the entry of a platform creates incentives for existing firms to increase the quality of their access products.
In addition, it is noteworthy that platform-owned access products are generally higher in quality compared with existing offerings, yet they are available at a lower price than their competitors. For example, Google Fiber provides a higher internet speed (1 Gbps) at a lower price ($70 per month), whereas Xfinity provides a much lower speed (250 Mbps) at a higher price ($75 per month) in cities such as Atlanta and Austin.1 Similarly, on comparing the price of Google's flagship phone Pixel with that of Motorola's flagship phone Moto Z in 2016, we note that the unlocked version of Moto Z was introduced at a price of $699 (Swider 2017) although the unlocked Pixel phone was launched at a price of $649 (McCann 2018).2 We further note that Google's Pixel overall scored better in quality measures than Moto Z, including in the crucial aspects of performance and features.3 In general, we expect that higher quality products would be sold at higher prices compared with lower quality products. However, this evidence shows that the platform's access products can be priced lower than their competitors even though they are of higher quality. This observation presents another piece of the puzzle related to platform entry, which is how entry by a platform creates incentives for its higher quality product to be priced lower than competing lower quality products.
1.1. Research Objective and Overview of Results
Given the preceding discussion, our main research objective is to study the competitive implications of a platform's entry into the access product market when (i) the platform's profits from advertising increase with the quality of access product used by a consumer and (ii) the market is relatively mature with limited scope for market expansion, for example, ISP market entry by Google Fiber and Google's smartphone market entry through Pixel phones.4 We expand the scope of our analysis in the latter part of the paper to analyze the role of market expansion with platform's entry.
In order to study these questions, we analyze a theoretical model of quality­price competition with two existing third-party firms in the access product market and an entrant, which could either be another

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

327

third-party firm or the platform that earns advertising profits through consumers who use the access products to utilize the platform's services. Our analysis yields some interesting theoretical results that are in line with our real-world observations. We first show that, when the platform enters the access product market, it can offer a higher quality product than the third-party firms at a lower price. This happens because the platform lowers its price below that of other access product providers to gain a relatively high market share. The loss in revenue from selling the access product at a lower price is more than offset by the additional advertising revenue the platform earns as a result of the relatively higher market coverage of the higher quality access product.
Second, we find that, unlike the entry of a thirdparty firm, the platform's entry into the access product market may lead both the firms and the platform to produce a higher quality product compared with the quality without the platform's entry. The intuition behind this result is that the platform accommodates the other firms by increasing its own price as they raise their qualities. The platform does this because provision of high-quality access products by its rivals enables it to earn higher advertising revenues. This price increase by the platform allows the other firms to increase their own prices, thus improving their marginal value of quality and leading to a higher equilibrium quality.
Third, we find that the platform always makes higher profits with its own entry as a result of either increased advertising revenue or additional profits from the sales of the access product or both. Finally, we show that the consumer surplus in the access product market is higher with the platform's entry even when the quality of the existing firms is lower than with a third-party firm entry because of the additional surplus provided by the platform's own higher quality access product.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the prior literature and our positioning in the literature. Section 3 describes the model, and Section 4 presents the equilibrium features. Section 5 provides the analysis and the intuition in detail. In Section 6, we analyze the case of market expansion with entry and perform robustness checks on our results, and we summarize the paper in Section 7. All proofs are provided in Appendix A.
2. Related Literature
Our paper is related to two main streams of literature: (i) expansion of platform businesses and (ii) impact of competition and complementarity on innovation.

2.1. Expansion of Platform Businesses
Platforms expand their business either by entering new markets or by improving the demand from their current market. Entering new platform-based markets requires Schumpeterian innovation by platforms as two-sided network externalities create high entry barriers and, consequently, winner-takes-all situations. However, this is not the only approach to market entry. Eisenmann et al. (2011) proposes that platforms can also enter new markets using an envelopment strategy, which exploits shared relationships of users with multiple platforms and targets these users by harnessing the benefits of price discrimination and/or economies of scope to reduce the cost of common components between platforms.
Besides entering new markets to expand their business, platforms can also improve demand for existing services using different approaches. For example, they increase the diversity of supply-side offerings by investing in first-party content (Hagiu and Spulber 2013), create exclusivity arrangements with content providers (Lee 2013), or even act as merchants in which case they completely take over the supply side (Hagiu and Wright 2015, Abhishek et al. 2016).
Our paper studies a novel approach for platforms to extend their business by entering into hardware product markets that are used by consumers to access the platform's services.
2.2. Impact of Competition and Complementarity on Innovation
Our paper is related to the literature on how competition affects innovation. Schumpeter (1942) asserts that monopoly rents create higher incentive for firms to innovate. Arrow (1972), on the other hand, argues that competition results in higher incentives to innovate. Extant literature indicates that the relationship between competition and innovation is complex and depends upon a number of factors, such as how innovation and competition are measured, market characteristics, and nature of competition. As the combination of these factors changes, so does this relationship (e.g., Ma and Burgess 1993, Banker et al. 1998, Goettler and Gordon 2011). Vives (2008) find that, when competition increases as a result of entry of new firms, innovation typically reduces.
Our paper is also related to the literature on quality innovation by firms operating in complementary businesses. A general finding in this literature is that independent firms selling complementary products produce lower quality than an integrated firm (Economides 1999, Yalcin et al. 2013, Ha et al. 2016).
We consider a setting in which a platform's entry into a complementary business increases competition. The literature on competition suggests that quality may

328

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

decrease because of entry, but the literature on innovation in complementary businesses suggests that quality may increase. Thus, we investigate a setting that allows us to ask the interesting question of what happens to quality of the product in a market when a platform enters a complementary business.
3. Model
In our setting, consumers can utilize the services provided by a platform using an access product. They need to purchase their own access product, but can use the platform's services for free. Further, thirdparty firms selling the access products do not incur a cost to make the platform's services available to the consumers. The platform earns advertising revenue for its services from the business side of the platform.
We analyze our research questions by considering the equilibrium outcomes under the following three scenarios.5
i. Two-firm benchmark: Two third-party firms compete in the access product market while the platform earns profits only from its advertising business.
ii. Third-party firm entry: Three third-party firms compete in the access product market while the platform earns profits only from its advertising business.
iii. Platform entry: Two third-party firms and the platform compete in the access product market, in which the platform earns profits from both product sales and its advertising business.
3.1. Firms We use the spokes model (Chen and Riordan 2007) to represent the locations of the different access product firms in a horizontally differentiated market. The spokes model generalizes the standard Hotelling model by allowing multiple firms to compete in a market in which each firm can compete with all other firms (e.g., Caminal and Claici 2007).
We consider a setting in which there is no market expansion resulting from firm entry.6 Therefore, we consider a model with three spokes in which each spoke is of length 12. All the spokes terminate at the center and originate at the other end. In the two-firm benchmark case, the access product is sold by two firms, A and B. These firms are located at the origins of two of the spokes. The origin of the third spoke is empty and is denoted by E (see Figure 2).
A third firm may enter the market with its own access product, and it locates itself at the origin of the empty spoke. If the entering firm is a third-party seller, we represent it by T, and if the entering firm is the platform, we represent it by P. Further, in order to maintain brevity of notation, all spokes are represented by the same name as their origin, and whether we refer to the origin of the spoke, or the spoke itself is made clear by the context of the exposition.

Figure 2. Three-Spoke Model

3.2. Consumers

A unit mass of consumers are uniformly distributed

over the entire spokes network. Thus, the total number

of consumers on i  {A, B, E/T/P}

each spoke is 13. A consumer on is represented by the location xi

spoke  [0, 12]

on spoke i, and the origin of the spoke is at zero. Firm i

is the most preferred brand for a consumer on spoke i,

and the second preferred brand is j i with probability 12, where j  {A, B, E/T/P}. A consumer needs one unit of the access product and chooses between the

most preferred brand and the second preferred brand

if both of these are available. Consumers are assumed

to have positive valuations for their first and second

preferred brands only. This is a simplifying assumption,

which has been made in several papers (Perloff and

Salop 1985, Schulz and Stahl 1996), including Chen

and Riordan (2007). One possible motivation for

this assumption is consumers' imperfect information.

When consumers have imperfect information, they

must search to find product information. Because

search is costly, consumers do not consider all the products.7 If only one of these brands is available, the

consumer purchases the access product from that firm.

Note that each consumer has at least one of the alter-

natives present in the market in all the three cases.

We represent the utility of a consumer at xi from buying the access product from firm j by Uij. Then, the utility of a consumer xi from the most preferred firm is Uii  + u(qi) - xi - pi, and the utility from the second preferred firm is Uij  + u(qj) - (1 - xi) - pj  i, j  {A, B, E/T/P}, and j i (Wolinsky 1997), where  is the per unit fit cost, pi is the price,  is the
base utility from the access product, and qi is the

quality of firm i that enhances user experience beyond

the base utility by u(qi).8 We assume u (q) > 0 and

u (q)  0  q  0, and u(0) 0. The concavity assump-

tion on u(q) captures the idea that, although an increase

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

329

in quality of the access product provides better access to the platform, allowing consumers to derive a higher utility, the marginal utility of quality steadily decreases. We assume that  is large enough so that the market is covered. We also assume  1 without any loss of generality. In the two-firm benchmark case, consumers on spoke E do not have their most preferred brand, implying UEE 0, but UEj  + u(qj)- (1 - xE) - pj  j  {A, B}.
3.3. Profit Function Here, we first derive the demands for the firms selling the access products and then use these expressions to formulate the profit functions of the access product firms as well as the platform.

3.3.1. Product Firms. 3.3.1.1. Two-Firm Benchmark. There

are (1/3) · (1/2) = 1/6 consumers on spoke A for whom

B

is

the

second

preferred

firm.

Similarly,

there

are

1 6

consumers on spoke B for whom A is the second

preferred firm. Therefore, the size of this consumer

segment is 13, and these consumers are uniformly distributed on the line constituted by joining spokes A

and B. For these consumers, the marginal consumer

indifferent between firms A and B is given by  + u(qA) - x¯AB - pA  + u(qB) - (1 - x¯AB) - pB (  x¯AB (1 + u(qA) - u(qB) - pA + pB)/2), where x¯AB is the distance of the marginal consumer from firm A.9 All consumers in

this segment to the left of x¯AB buy from firm A, and those to the right of x¯AB buy from firm B.
The remaining consumers on spokes A and B whose

second preferred firm is absent buy from A and B,

respectively. Thus, this consumer segment provides a

demand

of

1 6

for

each

firm.

All the consumers on spoke E are equally distrib-

uted between firms A and B as only one of these firms

is their second preferred firm and their most preferred

firm is absent. This consumer segment, therefore,

provides

a

demand

of

1 6

for

each

firm.

Therefore, demands for firm A and B are DA x¯AB/3 +

1/6 + 1/6 and DB (1 - x¯AB)/3 + 1/6 + 1/6, respectively.

Substituting x¯AB in the demand functions, we get

() ()

Di

1 + u qi 2

- u qj 6

- pi + pj

 i, j  {A, B},

where j i.

(1)

3.3.1.2. Third-Party Firm Entry and Platform Entry. With three firms on the spokes network, all consumers have both of their alternatives available in the market. Therefore, we consider the three segments of consumers for whom the preferred firms are A and B, A and T, and B and T. Therefore, we have three marginal consumers, x¯AB, x¯AT, and x¯BT, who are indifferent

between A and B, A and T, and B and T, respectively. All the consumers to the left of x¯AB buy from A, and those to the right of x¯AB buy from B. Similarly, all the consumers to the left of x¯BT buy from B, and the rest buy from T, and consumers to the left of x¯AT buy from
A, and the rest buy from T.
Consequently, the demands for the firms A, B, and T
are DA x¯AB/3 + x¯AT/3, DB (1 - x¯AB)/3 + x¯BT/3 and DT (1 - x¯AT)/3 + (1 - x¯BT)/3, respectively. Substituting x¯AB, x¯AT, and x¯BT in the demand functions, we get

() () ( )

Di

1 + 2u qi - u qj - u qk - 2pi + pj + pk

3

6

 i, j, k  {A, B, T},where i j, k and j k. (2)

The demand formulation for the access product firms

and the platform in the platform entry case is the same

as in the third-party firm entry.

Once the demands for firms are formulated, we can

write the profit functions of firms for any of the three

cases by incorporating the prices of the access products

and the cost of quality creation. For firm i, taking the cost

of

developing

a

product

of

quality

qi

to

be

cq2i 2

,

where

c > 0, and assuming the marginal cost of the product

to be zero, we write the profit functions of the firms

as follows:

i

piDi

-

cq2i 2

.

3.3.2. Platform. We represent the revenue from the platform's advertising per consumer when the consumer uses an access product of quality q by (q; a). We assume that this revenue earned from advertisers increases with the quality of the access product. As discussed in the introduction, this relationship ensues because, as the quality of the access product increases, the consumers consume more of the platform's services, allowing the platform to show more or better advertisements to consumers, thus increasing its revenues. However, because the consumers cannot indefinitely increase their consumption of the platform's services as the access product quality increases, we assume that the marginal advertising revenue per consumer weakly decreases with quality, implying (q; a) is concave in q. Further, the parameter a captures the strength of the relationship between the revenues generated from the platform's advertising services and the access product quality. Accordingly, we have q > 0, a > 0, qq  0, and (0; a) 0.
When the platform enters the market with its own access product, it generates revenue from two sources: its advertising business and sales of its access product; otherwise, it earns only from the advertising business.

330

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

We write the profit function of the platform as the following:

()

()

P

pP(++qqDAAP)DD((-qqAATBc))q2++D2PD+BT (+qqB(Bq)DA(Dq)BPBD)ADP

Two-firm benchmark; Third-party firm entry; Platform entry.

(3)

Note that, for brevity, we suppress the notation (q; a) to just (q) in expressing the platform's profit function and hereinafter.

3.4. Timeline The game proceeds in three stages. In the first stage, qualities are determined simultaneously by the respective firms. In the second stage, all firms simultaneously decide their prices. Finally, consumers buy an access product after observing the qualities and prices of all the products, and profits of the access product firms and the platform are realized. We use backward induction to solve for equilibrium prices and qualities.

4. Equilibrium Features
In this section, we present our analysis solving the game between the firms and the platform. We use
superscripts b, t, and m appended with an asterisk to denote equilibrium values in the two-firm benchmark case, the third-party firm entry case, and the platform entry case, respectively.10

4.1. Two-Firm Benchmark
We solve the first-order conditions of the two profit functions, A and B, with respect to prices, pA and pB, and obtain the expressions for price as a function of qualities as follows: pbi (qb) 3 + (u(qi) - u(qj))/3 for i  {A, B} and i j, where qb {qA, qB} is a vector of all the qualities in the benchmark case. After substituting these prices into i  i  {A, B} and then differentiating it with respect to quality, we obtain the marginal value of quality for firm i as:

i qi

1 27

( 9

-

() u qj

+

( )) u qi u

() qi

-

cqi,

where j i  {A, B}.

4.2. Third-Party Firm Entry
We use backward induction as in the two-firm
benchmark case to obtain the second-stage prices pti(qt) 1 + (2u(qi) - u(qj) - u(qk))/5  i j k  {A, B, T}, where qt {qA, qB, qT} represents all the qualities with third-party firm entry. Again, after substituting these prices into i  i  {A, B, T} and then differentiating it

with respect to quality, we get the marginal value of quality for firm i as:

i qi

4 75

( 5

-

() u qj

-

() u qk

+

( )) 2u qi u

() qi

-

cqi,

where j k i  {A, B, T}.

4.3. Platform Entry Note that parametric function  does not impact the equilibrium prices and qualities in the two-firm benchmark case or in the third-party firm entry case because the platform plays no strategic role in the access product competition. However, the platform affects the price and quality competition in the access product market when it launches its own product.
We solve the first-order conditions with respect to price to get the equilibrium prices as functions of the qualities (see Table 1). We denote them by pmi (qm) for i  {A, B, P}, where qm {qA, qB, qP} is a vector of all the qualities with platform entry.11 Using the prices obtained in Table 1, we obtain the marginal value of quality for the two access product firms and the platform, which can be found in Appendix A.1. We present a comparison of the equilibrium qualities between the firms and the platform in the platform entry case in our first lemma.
Lemma 1. In the Platform entry case, qmP  > qmA qmB .
The lemma states that, when the platform enters the market, the quality of the platform's access product is higher than that of firms A and B. This happens because the marginal value of quality is higher for the platform than the firms because of the presence of qualitydependent revenues from the platform's advertising business in addition to sales revenues. Using this finding, we obtain our next result comparing the prices of the access product of the platform with those provided by the firms.

Lemma 2. The price of the platform's access product is lower than the price of the firms' access products, that is, ((qmP ) - (qmA))/(u(qmP ) - u(qmA)) > 3/2.
In order to explain the intuition behind this result, we examine the price expressions in Table 1. The first term ( 1) comes from the pricing power resulting from horizontal differentiation. The second term captures any compensation for the difference in qualities between the competing firms. In equilibrium, this term is

Table 1. Prices as a Function of Quality with Platform Entry

Firm
A B P

Price

pmA (qm) pmB (qm)
pmP (qm)

1

+

2u(qA )-u(qP )-u(qB ) 5

+

(qA)+(qB )-2(qP) 10

1

+

2u(qB )-u(qP )-u(qA ) 5

+

(qA)+(qB )-2(qP) 10

1

+

2u(qP)-u(qA)-u(qB ) 5

+

3((qA)+(qB )-2(qP)) 10

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

331

positive for the platform and negative for the two firms because qmP  > qmA qmB  (Lemma 1).
The third term in the price expression arises because of the platform's incentives from its advertising business. This term has a negative sign because q > 0 andthequalityoftheplatform's access product is higher than that of the firms in equilibrium. The negative sign of this term reflects the platform's incentive to increase the market coverage of its own product, which is the highest quality product in the market, by reducing its price so that it can get relatively higher revenues from its services business. Further, the higher the impact of quality on the platform's advertising revenue (larger q), the higher will be the extent of price reduction by the platform.
In the case of the firms, the negative sign of the third term captures the effect of price competition on their prices resulting from the lowering of prices by the platform. However, the magnitude of this term is smaller for the firms compared with the magnitude of the corresponding term for the platform because the direct incentive of the platform to reduce its price is stronger than the indirect effect of price competition on the firms. Therefore, the price of the platform becomes lower than that of the firms when q is relatively large.
Combining the findings from these two lemmas, we obtain our first main insight into the nature of the equilibrium when the platform enters with its own access product.
Proposition 1. Even though the quality of the platform's access product is higher than that of the other firms, its price is lower when ((qmP ) - (qmA))/(u(qmP ) - u(qmA)) > 3/2.
This result highlights that the well-known result that higher quality products are priced higher (Tirole 1988) may not hold in this case. As described earlier, the main reason for this finding is the platform's incentives from its advertising business, that is, to increase the market coverage of the highest quality product. As mentioned in the introduction, this is also in line with our observations that, in certain cities, Google Fiber provides a higher internet speed (1 Gbps) at a lower price compared with other ISPs, such as Xfinity,12 and that Google's Pixel phone was considered better than Moto Z in many key aspects, and still it was available for a lower price.
Although the subsidy mechanism is used in both the razor blades model and the platform model to drive a firm's profits, the way in which the subsidy mechanism is used in the two models is different. In the razor blades model, a subsidy is provided on the primary product (razor) to entice the consumers to buy this product. The firm makes profits by selling the

secondary product (blades) at relatively high prices to the consumers who purchased the primary product. In the platform model, a subsidy is provided to one side of the market (typically consumers) to drive market growth on this side. The firm makes profits by selling its services to the other side of the market (typically the supply side). A comparison of the subsidy mechanism in the tying model, and the platform model is recorded in Parker and Van Alstyne (2005) and Rochet and Tirole (2003), in which they conclude that the use of subsidies in the context of tying and platforms is fundamentally different. In our context of platforms, we analyze a situation in which consumers enjoy a full subsidy as the use of the platform's services is free for them. We find that, in such situations, the platform may want to further extend the subsidy through the access products by providing higher quality products at relatively low prices (compared with access products provided by third-party access product firms).
In the following section, we compare the equilibrium values of qualities, profits, and consumer surpluses across the three cases to provide more insights into why a platform may choose to enter the access product market and how the effect of this entry differs from the entry of a third-party firm.
5. Analysis
5.1. Effect of Entry on Quality Here, we lay down how the qualities of access products in the two-firm benchmark case differ compared with the qualities in the third-party firm entry case.
Lemma 3. Compared with the two-firm benchmark case, the qualities of all the access products in the third-party firm entry case are lower, that is, qti < qbi   i  {A, B}.
This lemma establishes that, in our context, increased competition resulting from entry by a symmetric firm in the market leads to a reduction in the equilibrium quality. We wish to examine whether entry by the platform results in reduction of equilibrium qualities of access products just as in the case of third-party firm entry or an increase in equilibrium qualities of these products. We present our findings in the next result.
Proposition 2. A sufficient condition for qmP  > qmi  > qbi   i  {A, B} is
i.  (qbi )/u (qbi ) >  when  (q)/u (q) weakly decreases with q; or
ii.  (0)/u (0) >  when  (q)/u (q) increases with q, where  25/(5 - (qP) - u(qP)) - 4.
In order to explain the intuition behind the result, we consider the reaction function of a firm (say A) in

332

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

the two-firm benchmark case and the platform entry

case, which can be expressed as follows:

dbA dqA

pbA(qb)DqAbA + DpBbAdpdbBq(Aqb) - cqA

0.

Direct Strategic Effect

 Effect



dmA dqA

pmA(qm)DqAmA + k {B,P}DpkmAdpdmkq(Aqm) - cqA

0.

Direct Effect

Strategic Effect

We now write down the values of the direct and strategic effects in the two cases as follows.

5.1.1. Direct Effect.
DbA qA DmA qA

u (qA) ; 6
u (qA) . 3

5.1.2. Strategic Effect.

DlA pk

1 6

,

where

k



{B, P}

and

l



{b, m};

dpbB(qb) dqA
dpmP (qm) dqA
dpmB (qm) dqA

- u (qA) ; 3

3 (qA) - u (qA) ;

10

5

 (qA) - u (qA) .

10

5

Proposition 2 establishes that, when the slope of 

with respect to quality is large relative to the slope of

u, all the equilibrium qualities of access products with platform entry become higher than the quality in the two-firm benchmark case. Comparing the results in Lemma 3 with Proposition 2, we observe that an in-

crease in competition in the access product markets through the platform's entry may have the opposite

effect compared with an increase in competition through

entry by a symmetric access product provider. There is

also some anecdotal evidence in support of this propo-

sition, which shows that, postentry of Google Fiber, the incumbent ISPs in the cities improved their service (Davidson 2015).

The reason for this behavior can be understood by

observing that, in the platform entry case, the direct

effect on demand for firm A is positive (

u

(qA 3

))

and

independent of , just as it is in the two-firm bench-

mark case. However, unlike in the benchmark case, the strategic effect for firm A with the platform's entry becomes positive or smaller in magnitude (if it is

negative) when the slope of  with respect to quality

is high enough. When this strategic effect becomes

sufficiently large, the equilibrium response of firm A

(and firm B) is to raise its quality.

To understand the reason why firm A raises its

quality, we consider its incentives given the qualities

of the platform and firm B. As q increases, the platform gets a higher marginal value of quality from

firm A's product because it earns higher revenue from

advertising to consumers who access the platform

through firm A's product. Hence, when A increases its

quality, the platform has an incentive to accommo-

date

firm

A

by

raising

its

own

price

(note

that

dpmP (qm) dqA

becomes positive when q is large). Further, as the

platform raises its price, firm B also has an incentive to

increase

its

price

(note

that

dpmB (qm) dqA

also

becomes

pos-

itive when q is relatively large). Overall, the plat-

form's ability to earn from advertising creates an in-

centive to increase its price rather than to decrease its

price when a competing firm raises quality. This in-

centive of the platform increases the marginal value of quality for the firm, leading it to produce a higher quality.
To develop further insights into the comparison of qualities, platform's profits, and consumer surplus
across the three cases, we obtain closed-form solu-
tions for quality by making two simplifying assumptions: u(q) q and (q; a) aq, where a > 0;13 that is, both the consumer utility and the platform's advertising profit linearly increase in quality.14 We get a
unique subgame perfect Nash equilibrium in each case. The equilibrium values of qualities in the two-firm benchmark are given by qbA qbB qb 31c. Similarly, the equilibrium qualities in the third-party firm entry case are given by qtA qtB qtT qt 145c. The equilibrium values of qualities in the platform

entry case are:

qmA

qmB 

(4 + a)(25c - 4(1 + a)2) 15c(25c - (1 + a)(4 + 3a))

and

qmP 

4(1 + a)(25c - 15c(25c - (1

(1 + a)(4 + a)) + a)(4 + 3a))

.

See Appendix A.5 for equilibrium conditions. We present the comparative statics of the difference between the platform's equilibrium quality (qmP ) and firm A's equilibrium quality (qmA) with respect to parameters a and c in the following lemma.
Lemma 4. In the platform entry case, i. qmP  - qmA increases with respect to a. ii. qmP  - qmA decreases with respect to c.
The quality gap between the platform and the firms increases with a because the platform earns more per unit of quality (because of advertising revenue) and, hence, has a higher marginal benefit from raising quality than the firms. The quality dominance of the

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

333

platform reduces with c because, for a given value of a, as c increases, the firms and the platform have an incentive to decrease their quality. However, the platform decreases its product quality at a higher rate than the firms as the marginal cost is higher for the platform because of its higher quality. The higher rate of decrease reduces the gap between the platform's quality and the firm's quality as c increases.
We obtain our next two corollaries by comparing the equilibrium values of qualities across the two-firm benchmark case and the platform entry case.

Corollary 1. (i) qmA qmB  > qb when a > 1 and c > c^, and (ii) qmA qmB   qb otherwise.

This corollary says that the equilibrium quality of

the firms (as well as of the platform from Lemma 1) in

the platform entry case is higher than the benchmark

quality when a and c are large. In order to explain the

result, we compare the incentives of quality creation

of firm A at equilibrium in the two cases. The marginal

value of quality of firm A at qB qA is given by pbA(qb) ·

dDbA dqA
by

- cqA pmA (qm

)

1 3

-

cqA

· dDmA
dqA

-

in the two-firm benchmark case and cqA (1 - ((1 + a)(qP - qA))/5) · (4 + a)/

15 - cqA in the platform entry case.

First, note that parameter a impacts the marginal

value only in the platform entry case but not in the

two-firm benchmark case. Second, in the platform

entry case, a affects the marginal value of quality

both positively and negatively. The positive effect is

due

to

an

increase

in

the

total

demand

effect,

dDmA dqA

(= (4 + a)/15) because the direct effect on demand ( 13)

is independent of a, and the strategic effect ( (a - 1)/15)

increases with a. The negative effect of a is due to a

decrease in price, pmA(qm) (

1

-

(1+a)(qP 5

-qA

)),

as

qP

- qA

is positive (from Lemma 1) and increases with a

(Lemma 4(i)). However, the negative effect of a on price

is mitigated at high values of c as qP - qA is relatively low when c is large (Lemma 4(ii)). Thus, overall, the

positive effect of a dominates when both a and c are

large, leading the firms to produce a higher quality

than the benchmark quality. Otherwise, the negative

effect dominates, which results in firms producing a

lower quality than the benchmark quality.

Corollary 2. (i) qmP  < qb (ii) qmP   qb otherwise.

when

a

<

1 4

and

c > c~,

and

The first part of Corollary 2 points to the situation in

which the entry of the platform has similar quality

implications as any third-party firm entry; that is, all

the qualities are lower with the entry of a new firm (Lemma 3).15 This happens because, when a is small,

the platform's incentives are similar to that of a third-

party firm. Specifically, the marginal benefit of qual-

ity of the platform with its own entry is given by

4 75

(1

+

a)(5

+

2(1

+

a)(qP

-

qA)),

which

increases

with

a

as qP - qA increases with a and decreases with c as qP - qA decreases with c (Lemma 4). Therefore, the platform does not have enough incentive to produce a high-quality product when a is very small and c is relatively large. Otherwise, the platform produces a higher quality than the benchmark quality.
5.2. Effect of Entry on Profits of the Platform Comparing the profit of the platform in the two-firm benchmark case to that in the third-party entry case, we find that the platform profits reduce as a result of entry of a new product in the market. The result is stated in the following corollary to Lemma 3.
Corollary 3. bP > tP.
The reason for the finding in Corollary 3 is that the equilibrium qualities in the third-party firm entry case are lower than the qualities in the two-firm benchmark case, causing the platform to earn lower revenues from advertising with the entry of a new third-party firm into the access product market.
Next, we compare the profits of the platform in the two-firm benchmark case with that in the platform entry case. From Corollary 1(i), we see that the platform's entry results in higher qualities for all the firms compared with the benchmark case. Under such scenarios, the platform always earns higher revenue from advertising compared with the benchmark because all consumers use products of higher quality than the benchmark. Corollary 2(i) shows the case in which the platform earns lower revenues from advertising with its own entry because the qualities of the firms and the platform are lower compared with the benchmark qualities. Hence, revenues from the platform's advertising business can be higher or lower compared with the benchmark. When the platform's advertising profits are lower compared with benchmark, its entry would be beneficial only if the profits from sales of its access product can make up for the loss in the platform's advertising profits.
Note that the profits of the platform in the two-firm benchmark case are higher than its profits with thirdparty firm entry. Therefore, in order to identify when the platform's entry is profitable, we compare the total profits of the platform when it enters (sum of the profits from product sales and advertisements) with its profits in the benchmark case. We report the results of this comparison in the next proposition.
Proposition 3. The platform earns higher profits with its own entry compared with the two-firm benchmark case; that is, mP  > bP.
Proposition 3 clarifies that the entry strategy is always profitable for the platform. To further analyze why the platform gains through entry, we focus on identifying whether it is the new source of revenue from product sales

334

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

or higher revenues from the platform's advertising business that generates higher profits. Let mPs denote equilibrium platform profits from product sales and mPa the platform's profit from advertising in the platform entry case, in which mPs+ mPa mP .

Corollary 4. Compared with the two-firm benchmark case,

in the platform entry case,

i. The platform loses from product sales (mPs < 0) but

gains

revenues

from

advertising

(mPa

>

bP)

when

a

>

1 4

and c < c`.

ii. The platform gains from product sales (mPs > 0) but

loses

revenues

from

advertising

(mPa

<

bP)

when

a

<

1 2

and c > c´.

iii. The platform gains from both the sources in the rest

of the parameter ranges.

The expressions for parameter thresholds of c are algebraically tedious and, therefore, not mentioned here (see appendix). The intuition behind part (i) of the preceding proposition is as follows. When a is high, the platform has an incentive to create a high quality to gain from revenues from the platform's advertising business. When c is not too high, the platform creates such a high quality that it earns a negative profit from product sales. Therefore, the overall profit of the platform is higher because of revenues from advertising. For part (ii) of the result, we already know from Corollary 2(i) that all the equilibrium qualities in the platform entry case can be lower than the benchmark quality when a is small and c is high. This leads to lower revenues from the platform's advertising services in the platform entry case compared with the two-firm benchmark case. Hence, the overall profits of the platform are higher because of positive profits from product sales.

5.3. Effect of Platform Entry on Consumer Surplus In this section, we analyze the implications of the platform's entry into the access product market for consumer surplus (CS).
We know that the qualities with entry of a thirdparty firm reduce compared with the benchmark case (Lemma 3). However, because of the presence of an additional firm, the fit cost of the products to consumers as well as the prices are lower. Hence, consumer welfare may increase or decrease with a thirdparty firm entry compared with the two-firm benchmark case. We present a formal comparison of the consumer surplus in the two cases in the following lemma.
Lemma 5. The consumer welfare in the case of third-party firm entry is higher than in the two-firm benchmark case.
This lemma implies that the impact of lower prices and lower fit cost with the third-party firm entry dominates the effect of lower qualities, thus improving overall consumer surplus.

From Corollary 2(i), we know that the platform's entry can cause all the qualities to be lower than the two-firm benchmark quality. Here, we present another lemma comparing the equilibrium qualities in third-party firm entry and platform entry cases.
Lemma 6. (i) qmP  > qt  c, and (ii) qt > qmA qmB   c < (4(1 + a)(2 + a))/25.
The platform always produces a higher quality than a third-party entrant because its marginal value of quality is higher than such an entrant because, unlike a third-party firm, it also earns revenue from the quality-dependent advertising business. From the second part of the lemma, we can see that the firms' qualities in the platform entry case are lower than even in the third-party firm entry case when c is small. To understand the intuition behind the result, recall from the discussion of Corollary 1 that, as c decreases, the negative effect of a on price strengthens relative to the positive effect of a on demand. Thus, at very low values of c, the quality of firms drops below the quality in the third-party firm entry case.
Therefore, the consumers might be worse off because of entry of the platform compared with the entry of a third-party firm. In order to gain clarity on the direction of the change in consumer welfare, we compare the consumer surplus in the third-party entry case with that in the platform entry case.
Proposition 4. The consumer surplus in the platform entry case is higher than in the third-party firm entry case.
When comparing the third-party firm entry with the platform's entry, we note that both cases have the same level of competition (number of firms). Hence, the relative surpluses now depend on the equilibrium qualities and prices, and we find that consumer welfare is higher with the platform's entry. The reason is that, although firms may have lower qualities in the platform entry case compared with the third-party firm entry case and, hence, generate lower surpluses for their consumers, the platform's access product always provides a higher surplus to its consumers as its quality is higher than the quality with third-party firm entry, and its price is also relatively low.
6. Robustness Checks
In this section, we confirm the robustness of our findings in two ways. First, we allow for market expansion with new entry by analyzing the spokes model with an arbitrarily large number of spokes. Note that we showed our results in Propositions 1 and 2 using general forms of concave functions for consumer utility and the platform's advertising revenue per consumer. However, because of analytical intractability, we could not show our results in Propositions 3 and 4 using those functions. Therefore, as a second

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

335

robustness check, we conduct a numerical analysis to confirm our results in these two propositions.
6.1. Market Expansion
Here, we consider a spokes model with N spokes, in which N  4. This setup ensures that there are at least two empty spokes in the two-firm benchmark case, thus allowing for market expansion with the entry of a new firm at one of the empty spokes. The market expansion becomes possible in this model because the first preferred firm for the consumers on the empty spokes is not available. Further, even the second preferred firm for some of these consumers is not available because it may be the one on one of the other empty spokes. Therefore, such consumers do not purchase any access product. However, when a thirdparty firm or the platform enters on one of the empty spokes, the first preferred firm becomes available for all consumers on that spoke. In addition, the entering firm (or the platform) becomes the second preferred firm for some consumers on the other empty spokes. Therefore, entry results in market expansion as more consumers purchase the access products. For analytical tractability, we continue to assume that (q) and u(q) are linear. The details of the analysis are provided in Appendix A.14.
We find that the platform's product quality is higher, but its price is lower than the firms when a > 32. Therefore, Proposition 1 holds in this setting. There also exist parameter ranges in which all the qualities with platform entry are higher than the qualities in the twofirm benchmark and the third-party entry cases. Therefore, existence of the result in Proposition 2 is also confirmed.
We also find that the platform earns higher profits than the benchmark case and the third-party firm entry case. Hence, the finding reported in Proposition 3 is confirmed. Finally, we find the consumer welfare is always higher with platform entry compared with a third-party firm entry. Hence, Proposition 4 is also confirmed.
6.2. Numerical Analysis with Strictly Concave u(q) and (q)
In this section, we wish to analyze if the results in Propositions 3 and 4 hold when we consider a consumer utility function and a platform's advertising profit function that are strictly concave in quality. Specifically, we assume u(q) q and (q) aq, where 0 <  < 1.
The analysis of the model with strictly concave consumer utility and platform advertising profit (u(q) q and (q) aq, where  < 1) is much more algebraically tedious than the analysis with a linear utility or profit function. For all three cases, we solve the pricing stage analytically to obtain expressions for the prices as a function of qualities. Next, to determine the equilibrium qualities, we substitute the prices into

the profit functions and try to solve the first-order conditions with respect to quality. The solution to this stage is analytically intractable, so we conduct a comprehensive numerical analysis. We consider integer values of c ranging from 1 to 20 and a  {0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8} while keeping  0.5. We find 50 points (qualities) from this parameter space that satisfy the equilibrium conditions, and plot Figure 3 using these points.
In Figure 3(a), we plot (qmA, qb) for different sets of parameter values as points and qb qmA as a straight line. Thus, any point below the line refers to an equilibrium in which qmA > qb. We find parameter values in which all the equilibrium qualities are higher with the platform's entry compared with the two-firm benchmark case (qmP  > qmA > qb), which is in line with Corollary 1(i). Similarly, for checking Propositions 3 and 4, we plot (mP , bP) and (CSm, CSt) in Figure 3, (b) and (c), respectively. We find that all the points lie below the line in both graphs, supporting Propositions 3 and 4. Thus, our analysis confirms that the primary insights can continue to hold in the analyzed parameter space when we consider  < 1.
7. Summary and Future Work
In this paper, we introduce the concept of access products needed by consumers to access services provided by platforms and study why dominant platforms, such as Google and Facebook, enter into the access product businesses, such as internet service provision, smartphones, etc., in which established third-party access provider firms already exist. We analyze a setting in which the market for these platforms and the access products is already covered, but there is scope for improvement in a platform's business through an increase in the quality of access products in the market. To examine how entry by a platform in a related access product market impacts access product qualities and the platform's profits and welfare, we develop a theoretical model of quality and price competition among two third-party firms and an entrant in the access product market that could be another third-party firm or the platform. The key factor in our model is the complementarity between the quality of the access products and profits from the advertising business of the platform. Our analysis yields several interesting findings and uncovers new reasons behind platform expansion.
We find that entry of the platform into the access product market can lead to a reversal of the usual high quality­high price result. Specifically, the platform's product can be of higher quality than that of the thirdparty firms while being offered at a lower price when the platform's advertising business is profitable enough. This happens because the platform benefits from increases in the revenues from advertising as the

336

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

Figure (q)

a3. q(Color

online)

Plots

of

a

Firm's

Equilibrium

Qualities,

Platform's

Profits,

and

Consumer

Surplus

for

u(q)

q and

market coverage of the highest quality access product (the platform's product) increases.
We also find that, unlike the entry of a symmetric third-party firm, entry of the platform into the access product market can increase the quality of all the firms in the market. This happens because the platform benefits from higher platform advertising revenues as qualities of the access provider firms increase. This creates an incentive for the platform to increase the

price of its own access product when the other access provider firms increase their qualities. In turn, this creates an incentive for the access provider firms to raise their qualities.
When the forces of competition dominate the incentives described here, the qualities of all the access products might also decrease with the platform's entry. However, we find that the platform always has an incentive to expand by entering the access product

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS
market as total profits of the platform increase because profits from product sales more than compensate for the losses in its advertising business.
We also analyze the welfare implications of the entry of a platform with the access product market. Contrary to common belief, we find that a platform's entry into this access product market increases consumer welfare as it makes the market more competitive compared with the entry of a third-party firm. The benefits of a platform's entry to consumers come from a lower price for a possibly higher quality product. We also establish our results in the context when the market expands with entry.
Our approach has several limitations, which provide interesting directions for future research. One natural extension of our work would be to study this entry strategy when there are competing platforms. It might also be interesting to analyze this strategy for platforms when the platform charges a price to the consumers and/or the access provider firms to access the platform. Further, in this paper, we only endogenized the quality of the access products and not the quality of the platform's services or its advertising efficiency. It would be useful to analyze the consequences of endogenizing the qualities of both the platform service and the access products.

Acknowledgments The authors thank the seminar participants at the University of Florida and Georgia Institute of Technology and the attendees of the 2017 Workshop on Information Systems and Economics and 2017 Conference on Information Systems and Technologies. They also thank the editors and the two anonymous referees for their constructive feedback.

Appendix A

A.1. Proof of Lemma 1

Substituting the price expressions from Table 1 into the

profit functions, we get the profits i as a function of

qualities. We now look at the marginal value of increasing

quality

i qi

for

the

three

firms.

A qA

1 150

( 4u (

() qA )

+ (



( ))( qA 10 )(

+ )

()  qA
(

() +  qB ))

- 2 qP + 4u qA - 2u qB - 2u qP - cqA,

B qB

1 150

( () 4u qB ()

+ (



( ))( qB 10 )(

+ )

()  qA
(

() +  qB ))

- 2 qP - 2u qA + 4u qB - 2u qP - cqB,

P qP

4 75

( u (

() qP )

+

 (

( ))( qP 5 )(

() -  qA -
)(

()  qB ))

+ 2 qP - u qA - u qB + 2u qP - cqP.

In equilibrium, all three derivatives must simultaneously

equal zero. One can see that, at any qmA qmB qmP qm, we

have

A qA

B qB

,

but

P qP

-

A qA

- P B
qP qB



(qm ) 5

>

0.

Therefore,

337

in equilibrium, qmA qmB  qmP . Now, because of concavity

of the profit function some qmP  > qmA. 

in

quality,

that

is,

2  q2

<

0,

P qP

0 at

A.2. Proof of Lemma 2

In equilibrium, qB qA. Then, we have pmP (qm) -pmA(qm)

3(u(qP

)-u(qA 5

))

-

2((qP

)-(qA 5

)).

Therefore, we have pmP 

<

pmA

when

(qmP )-(qmA) u(qmP )-u(qmA)

>

32.

For example, with (q) aq and u(q) q, pmP  - pmA

a(3-2a) 25c-(1+a)(4+3a)

<

0

for

a

>

3 2

if

c > c¯,

where

c¯

is

defined

in

Appendix A.5. 

A.3. Proof of Lemma 3

We

have

bi qi

1 27

(9

-

u(qj)

+

u(qi))u

(qi)

-

cqi.

In

equilibrium,

both firms produce the same quality because of symmetric

competition. Let qbA

qbB

qb.

Therefore,

we

have

u (qb) 3qb

c.

Similarly,

we

have

ti qi

4 75

(5

-

u(qj)

-

u(qk

)

+

2u(qi

))u

(qi) -cqi.

In equilibrium, all three firms produce the same quality

because of symmetric competition. Let qtA qtB qtT qt.

Therefore,

we

have

4u (qt) 15qt

c.

u (qb) 3qb

c

and

4u (qt) 15qt

c together

imply that

qt qb

4u 5u

((qt

) )

qb

.

(A.1)

Suppose qb  qt. Then, the left-hand side of (A.1) is weakly greater than one. Also, then, u (qt)  u (qb) as u (q)  0. But
this leads to a contradiction as the right-hand side of (A.1) now becomes less than one. Therefore, qb > qt. 

A.4. Proof of Proposition 2

dbA dqA

0

implies

u

(qA 9

)

(3

+

u(qA

)-u(qB 3

))

cqA. Because we know

that there is a symmetric solution in this case, the equi-

librium value of qA is obtained by substituting qA qB

in

this

equation.

Thus,

we

get

qbA

by

solving

u (qA) 3

cqA.

Next, consider the reaction function of firm A in the

platform entry case. Using the fact that qB qA in equilibrium,

we

get

(4u (qA)+ (qA))(5-(qP)+(qA)-u(qP)+u(qA)) 75

cqA. qmA satisfies

this equation.

We want to find conditions in which qbA < qmA. A sufficient

condition

for

qbA

<

qmA

is

(4u

(qA )+

(qA ))(5-(qP )+(qA )-u(qP )+u(qA )) 75

>

u (qA) 3



qA

 qbA;

that

is,

the

marginal

benefit

of

increasing

quality is higher with platform entry. This inequality can be

rewritten

as

 u

(qA ) (qA )

>

25 5-(qP )+(qA )-u(qP )+u(qA )

-

4

as

5 - (qP) +

(qA) - u(qP) + u(qA) > 0 for pmA(qm) > 0. A lower bound of

5 - (qP) + (qA) - u(qP) + u(qA) is 5 - (qP) - u(qP) as (qA),

u(qA) > 0. Substituting this value of the lower bound in the

right-hand side of the inequality, we get an upper bound

of

the

expression

that

we

represent

by

.

When

 (q) u (q)

is

weakly decreasing in q, a sufficient condition for qmA > qbA

is in

 u
q,

(qbA ) (qbA )

>

.

On

the

other

hand,

when

a sufficient condition for qmA > qbA is

 (q) u (q)

is

increasing

 u

(0) (0)

>

.

As

for

the

relationship between qmP  and qbA, from Lemma 1, we already

know that qmP  > qmA. 

338

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

A.5. Equilibrium Conditions for Section 5 We first check the second-order conditions for equilibrium stability at both the second (price) stage and the first (quality) stage. Let

Mbp



2bA pApA
2bB
pBpA

2bA pApB
2bB
pBpB





-1 3 1 6

1

6

-

1 3

,

and

Mlp



2lk
pk pk 2lA
pApk 2lB
pBpk

2lk
pk pA 2lA1
pApA 2lB
pBpA

2lk
pk pB 2lA
pApB 2lB
pBpB





-2 3 1 6 1 6

1 6 -2 3 1 6

1

6 1

6

-

2 3



for

(l, k)



{(t,

T),

(m,

P)}.

The

eigenvalues

of

Mbp

are

-

1 2

and

- 16, and the eigenvalues of Mtp and Mtp are - 56, - 56, and - 13. Mbp,

Mtp, and Mmp are all negative definite as all their eigenvalues

are negative.

Let us denote the profit functions of the firms as functions of

qualities as li1(qi, q-i)  i  {A, B, E/T/P} and l  {b, t, m}. Let

Mb



2bA1 qAqA 2bB1 qBqA

2bA1 qAqB 2bB1 qBqB



[ 21-7 -217c

] 21-7 -217c ,

Mt



2 tT1 qT qT
2tA1 qAqT
2tB1 qBqT

2 tT1 qT qA
2tA1 qAqA
2tB1 qBqA

2tT1 qT qB
2tA1 qAqB
2tB1 qBqB





8 75

-

c

-4 75

-4 75

-

4 75

8 75

-

c

-4 75

-

4 75

-4 75

8 75

-

c



,

and

Mm



2mP1 qPqP
2 mA1 qAqP
2mB1 qBqP

2 mP1 qPqA
2mA1 qAqA
2 mB1 qBqA

2mP1 qPqB
2mA1 qAqB
2mB1 qBqB





- -

8 75

(1

+

a)2-c

1 75

(1

+

a)(4

+

1 (1 + a)(4 +

75

a) a)

-

4 75

(1

+

a)2

1 150

(4

+

a)2

-c

1 (a - 2)(4 + a)

150

-

4 75

(1

+

a)2

1 150

(a

-

2)(4

+

a)

1 (4 + a)2-c

150

.

The

eigenvalues

of

Mb

are

2 27

-

c

and

-c

and

of

Mt

are

4 25

-

c,

4 25

-

c,

and

-c.

Mb

and

Mt

are

negative

definite

if

all

its

ei-

genvalues are negative, implying c > 245. Mm is negative

definite iff all the eigenvalues of Mms

Mm +(Mm ) 2

are negative

as Mm itself is not symmetric.Theeigenvalueso f Mms are

1 25

(4

+

a

-

25c),

510(a(3a+7)-(a+1)2(a(11a+

24)

+

16)

+

4

-

50c),

and

1 50

(a(3a

+

7)

+

(a + 1)2(a(11a + 24) +16)+4-50c). There-

fore, we require c > c

1 50

(a

+

1)(3a

+

a(11a + 24) + 16 + 4) > 245.

We further require c

qmi 

>

0,

pmi 

>

0,

and

2 3

>

> c¯ Dmi 

Max{(1+a)2(54+5a) , 4+a(255+6a)} > c > 0  i  {A, B, P}. Note that

for the

maximum demand for a product can only be 2/3 as half of the consumers on the two nonfocal spokes do not consider the product. We assume c > c¯ throughout the main text of the paper. As mentioned in Endnote 9, we only consider the interior solutions because we are interested in equilibria in which all three products (two third-party firm products A and B and the platform's product P) have a positive market share in the customer segments in which they compete. Otherwise, the platform's product covers the whole market in the segments in which it competes with product A or B, and the two third-party firm products, A and B, get demand from the market segments in which only the two of them compete. Therefore, our choice of parameters avoids the unrealistic scenario in which all the consumers who consider a third-party firm product (A or B) and the platform's product choose to buy the platform's product.
We also check for any profitable, unilateral, nonlocal deviation when a firm reduces its price such that all exclusive and nonexclusive consumers of this firm choose to buy from it. We check for these deviations for the firms and the platform in all the three cases. Further, we also check a firm's incentives to deviate by catering to only its exclusive consumers in the two-firm benchmark case. Note that this second type of deviation is only possible in the two-firm benchmark case and not in the two cases of entry as all the consumers have both their choices available when all the three spokes are occupied. We find that no such profitable deviations are possible when c > c¯ and  is large enough in all three cases.
In order to check for a profitable, nonlocal deviation, we first find the price to which a firm deviates to cover its targeted market (as described) given the equilibrium prices of the other firms and the equilibrium qualities of all the firms. Then, we calculate the profit of the firm by deviating and find that, as long as c > c¯ and  is large enough, the profits are always higher without deviating for any firm (or the platform).
A.5.1. Relevance of the Parameter Ranges in the Real World. The interior solutions exist only when c is larger than some threshold (c¯, which is positive and an increasing function of a). This is because, when quality is less costly to produce (c is small), the platform produces a very high quality and charges a low price and covers the entire market segment in which it competes, leading to a corner solution. Note that a very similar argument could be made if c > c¯ is interpreted as the range in which a is relatively small (because c¯ increases with a).
We want to ensure that these parameter values are pertinent in reality. However, we do not have any empirical data about the prevailing values of the parameters c and a in any context of platform entry. However, we do not observe any empirical data about the prevailing values of the parameters c and a in any context of platform entry. Hence, we cannot directly determine whether c > c¯ holds in reality. Therefore, we adopt an indirect approach consisting of three steps. First, we assume several sets of parameter values of c and a in which the interior solutions exist and calculate the ratio of (i) a third-party firm's revenue to its fixed cost of quality creation and (ii) the platform's

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS
advertising revenue to its product sales revenue at each such set of parameter values. The ratios represent the parameters of interest. Next, we access publicly available data to empirically determine the values of these two ratios in the real world. Finally, if the values of the ratios we observe empirically are similar to values we calculated numerically in the previous step, then we have evidence that the parameter values we consider result in outcomes that are also observed empirically. Therefore, the set of parameter values that we consider in our analysis are consistent with reality.
To implement the approach, we pick 1,000 random sets of points (i.e., pairs of values of parameters c and a) in which c > c¯ is satisfied and numerically calculate the equilibrium values of the two ratios based on our model. We depict the values of these ratios in a scatter plot in Figure A.1. For expositional purposes, we only show the points at which the two ratios are less than 20 and 4, respectively, as most of the points lie in this region. The whitespace to the left of the solid line in the figure represents the parameter range in which the condition c > c¯ does not hold.
We now check if these points reflect the values of the ratios we observe in the real world. To that end, we consider the value of the two ratios in the U.S. ISP market. We first look at Verizon's (a third-party firm) revenue to its fixed cost ratio. Verizon's $23 billion investment in a fiber-optic internet service upgrade in the mid-2000s (Chang 2009) has been followed by about $30 billion of yearly wireline revenue for over a decade for the company.16 This implies that the revenue generated by firms is about 13 ( 3010/23) times their investment in quality. Next, we analyze the ratio of Google's advertising revenues to its revenues from Google Fiber services. Google earned about $500 million from Fiber in 2018 (Baumgartner 2019) by being available in markets covering a population of about two million consumers.17 As Google earns close to $250 per user on average in the United States primarily through advertising (Filloux 2019), its total advertising revenue from Fiber markets is also around $500 million. This makes the ratio of platform's ad revenue to product revenue around one. As we can observe in the figure, there exist plenty of valid data points

339

(at which c > c¯ holds) even in a small elliptical region surrounding both the ratio values (13 and 1), that is, the point (13, 1). Further, note that points that do not satisfy this criterion lie very far from the observed values of the ratios.
As a secondary check of the feasibility of the valid parameter range in the real world, note from Figure A.1 that the values of the two equilibrium ratios cover a wide range of values. This provides further evidence that the considered parameter values are very likely to exist in the real world.

A.6. Proof of Lemma 4

qmP  - qmA

5a 25c-3a2 -7a+4

>

0.

i. (qmP -qmA)
a

5(25c+3a2 -4) ((a+1)(3a+4)-25c)2

>

0



c.

ii.

(qmP  -qmA) c

-

125a ((a+1)(3a+4)-25c)2

<

0



a.



A.7. Proof of Corollary 1

qmA - qb

(a+4)(25c-4(a+1)2 )-5

25c-(a+1)(3a+4)
15c

> 0  a > 1 and c > c^

Max{(4a32+59(aa2-+1a)-4) , c¯},

where c¯ is defined in Appendix A.5. 

A.8. Proof of Corollary 2

qmP  - qb

< 0  a < and c > c~ 4(a+1)(25c-(a+1)(a+4))-5 25c-(a+1)(3a+4)

1

15c

4

(4-245a(31--94aa2)-a).



A.9. Proof of Corollary 3

Substituting qA qB qT in the second-stage prices we

obtained in Section 4, we get pbA pbB pb 3 and ptA

ptB pt 1. We then substitute the equilibrium qualities

and prices into the demand functions to get DbA and DtA DtB DtT 13.

DbB

1 2

Substituting the equilibrium qualities and demands into

the profit function of the firms in each case, we obtain equi-

librium profits in the two cases: bi 

3 2

-

1 18c

for

i



{A,

B}

and

ti

1 3

-

8 225c

for

i  {A, B, T}.

An

unusual

feature

of

the

equilibrium firm profits is that they increase with respect

to c. This happens because the firms are unable to internalize

any benefit of increasing quality in the first stage (as c de-

creases) because of symmetric price competition in the

second stage.

Figure A.1. (Color online) Sample Valid Range of the Ratio of (i) Firm's Revenue to Cost and (ii) Platform's Ad Revenue to Product Revenue

340

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

Substituting the equilibrium qualities and demands into

the profit function of the platform in each case, we obtain its

equilibrium profits in the two cases: bP

a 3c

>

tP

145ac. 

A.10. Proof of Proposition 3

Substituting equilibrium qualities into the price expres-

sions given in Table 1, we get the equilibrium prices as pmA

pmB 

25c-4(1+a)2 25c-(1+a)(4+3a)

and

pmP 

2 + 25c-9a(+1+4-a)2(45+c 3a). We then sub-

stitute the equilibrium qualities and prices into the profit

function of the platform to obtain its equilibrium profit mP .

The platform's gain from its own entry is given by

mP  - bP
46875c3 + 625c2(a - 2)(a + 16) - 25c(a + 1) (a + 4)(a(86a + 73) - 28) + 4(a + 1)3 (a + 4)(a(43a + 50) - 8) (25c - (a + 1)(3a + 4))2
225c

-75a .

This is greater than 0  c > c¯ and a > 0, where c¯ is derived in Appendix A.5. 

A.11. Proof of Corollary 4

We

have

mPs

pmP DmP 

-

cqmP  2 2

(25c-(a+1)(a+4))(1282755cc(22-5c2-5(ca(+a(12)6(a3+a+341)))+220)+8(a+4)(a+1)3)<0when c < c`,

where c` 1150(26a2 + 580a4 +940a3 +561a2 -8a+16+31a+20).

BaAnu.5Wdt.c`Te>mPhhseac¯r<veoef0nolryemP,acw<hmPesac`n(wqmAa0h>demAn14,ca+ww>qhhmB14ee.rndemBac¯+is14q,dmPaednrmPdiv)ce.dThic`newnAh, pepnean>di14x,

mPa

-a(2bP(625c2

(a+2)-100c(a+4)(a+1)2 +2(a+4)(3a+4)(a+1)3 ((a+1)(3a+4)-25c)2

)

-

) 5

.

15c

This is positive for c < c´

4a3+9a2- 2

-a2 (a+1)2 (4a2 +5a-4)+a-4 50a-25

when

a < 12, and  c when a  12. Now, c` < c´  0 < a < 12. Therefore,

we have (i) mPs < 0 and mPa > bP for c < c` and a > 14, and

(ii) mPs > 0 and mPa < bP for c > c´ and a < 12. 

A.12. Proof of Lemma 6

We have qmP  - qt

4a((1+a)(2+a)-25c) 15c(25c-(1+a)(4+3a))

>

0



c

>

c¯

and

a > 0,

and qmA - qt

a(25c-4(1+a)(2+a)) 15c(25c-(1+a)(4+3a))

<

0



c

<

4 25

(1

+

a)(2

+

a),

where

c¯

is derived in Appendix A.5. 

A.13. Proofs of Lemma 5 and Proposition 4 CS in the benchmark case and the two cases of entry are given by the following:

CSb



+

1 3

( x¯bAB
0

( qbA

-

x

-

) pbA

dx

+

1(

 ( x¯bAB 1

qbB

-

(1

-

x) )

-

) pbB dx +
 1(

 1( 2 qbA
0

-

x

-

) pbA
)

dx

+ 2 qbB - x - pbB dx + 2 qbA - (1 - x) - pbA dx

0
 1(

) 0)

+ 2 qbB - (1 - x) - pbB dx ,

0

where x¯kij denotes the equilibrium location of the consumer who is indifferent between products i and j in case

k  {b, t, m}. The first constant term comes from the base

utility of all the consumers, and the other integral terms

represent the sum of net surplus from quality across all

consumers. Specifically, the first two integral terms are

for consumers whose two preferred firms are A and B,

the next two integral terms are for consumers who only

have their first choice available, and the last two terms are

for consumers who only have their second choice avail-

able. Similarly,

CSj



+

1 3

( x¯jAB
0

( qjA

-

x

-

) pjA

dx

+

1
x¯ jAB

( qjB

-

(1

-

x)

-

) pjB

dx

+

 x¯jAi
0

( qjA

-

x

-

) pjA

dx

+

1
x¯ jAi

( qji

-

(1

-

x)

-

pji

+



x¯ jBi

( qjB

0

-

x

-

) pjB

dx

+

1
x¯ jBi

( qji

-

(1

-

x)

-

) pji

) dx )
dx

for (i, j)  {(T, t), (P, m)}. Note that, in this case, every consumer has both choices available.

CSm

CSb  + 1 - 41 . 3c 12

CSt  + 4 - 5 . 15c 4



1250c2(g(11a + 25) + 20) - 5c(a + 1)(a(a(187a + 767)

+

+1400)

+

880) + 16(a + 1)3(a + 4)(3a + 4) 60c(25c - (a + 1)(3a + 4))2

-

46875c3

.

Given these expressions, we have CSm > CSt > CSb  c > c¯ and a > 0, where c¯ is derived in Appendix A.5. 

A.14. Spokes Model with N  4

As in Section 5.1, we assume u(q) q and (q; a) aq. For

any firm, the demand comes from (i) consumers who have

both their choices available and (ii) those who only have one

of

their

choices

available.

With

N

spokes,

there

are

1 N

con-

sumers on each spoke, and the probability that the second

preferred product of a consumer on spoke i  {1, 2..N} is j

i  {1, 2..N} equals N1-1. In the benchmark case, there are two occupied spokes

and N - 2 have both

tehmeiprtcyhsopicoekseasv, aleilaadbilneg. TtoheNr(eN2a-1r)ecaolnsosuNmN(N-e-2r1s) mwahsos

of consumers for whom A or B is their second choice and

their

first

choice

is

not

available.

Similarly,

N-2 N(N-1)

mass

of

consumers on spoke A or B only have their first choice

available. Therefore, we can write the demand function for

firm i  {A, B} in the benchmark case as follows:

Di

2 N(N -

1)

(x¯ ij

+

(N

-

2))

qi

- qj - pi + N(N - 1)

pj

-

3- N(N

2N - 1)

for

i

j  {A, B},

where x¯ij represents the consumer who is indifferent between firms i and j, which is still given by the solution to  + qi - x - pi  + qj - (1 - x) - pj. With the entry of a new product at one of the empty spokes, a fraction of those who

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

341

had no choice available in the benchmark case now have one choice available. This set of consumers leads to market expansion with new entry. As previously in the benchmark case, the demand function in the third-party entry and the platform entry cases (with three occupied spokes) can be written as follows:

Di

2 N(N -

1)

(x¯ ij

+

x¯ ik

+

(N

-

3))

2qi

- qj

- qk - 2pi + pj N(N - 1)

+ pk

+

2(N - 2) N(N - 1)

 i, j, k  {A, B, T/P} and i j k.

We use the demand functions to write the profit functions of

the firms and the platform and then solve for prices in terms

of qualities. We finally substitute these prices into the profit

functions to solve for the optimal qualities. We get the equi-

librium qualities, prices, and platform's profits as follows:

Two-firm benchmark case: qbA qbB qb

pbB

pb

2N - 3, bP

4a(3-2N)2 3c(N -1)2 N 2

.

Third-party firm entry case: qtA qtB qtT

ptA

ptB

ptT

pt

N - 2, tP

48a(N-2)2 5c(N -1)2 N 2

.

3cN4N(N--6 1), pbA qt 5c8NN(-N1-61),

Platform entry case: We report the equilibrium qualities

and prices in Table A.1. Substituting the equilibrium qualities

and prices into the profit function, we get the equilibrium

profit of the platform in the platform entry case.

mP 

1 (225(Nc(N--2)12)(21N223(864aa(63a++1071) 0-828a55c(N - 1)N + 24)2

+ 24a4(11844 - 1075c(N - 1)N)

+ 12a3(30072 - 12575c(N - 1)N)

+ 2a2(25c(N - 1)N(25c(N - 1)N - 4086)

+ 101088) + 4a(25c(N - 1)N - 24)

× (175c(N - 1)N - 288)

+

(24

-

25c(N

-

1)N)2(25c(N

-

1)N

-

) 16) .

We require c > cN Max{6(215+(Na)-(41+)N5a) , 6(2a5((6Na+-51))+N4)} for the equilibria to exist and be stable. Hereinafter, we assume c > cN.

Proposition A.1. We have qmP  - qmA

30a(N-2) 25c(N-1)N-6a(3a+7)-24

>

0

a > 0, and pmP  - pmA

6a(3-2a)(N-2) 25c(N-1)N-6a(3a+7)-24

<

0

when

a > 32.

Therefore, the platform's quality is higher than that of the

firms, but its price is lower when a > 32. 

Proposition and qt < qb

A.2. We have qt - qb for N 4. Therefore,

154cNN(-N1-8 1). qt we compare

> qb  N qmA with

5 qb

when N 4 and with qt when N  5.

At N

4, qmA - qb

> 0 when c > 12((aa++14))((32a(++41))2--502c5c)-25
90c

(a+1)(3a(8a+15)-4) 50(6a-1)

and a > 16. For N  5,

qmA - qt

2a(N-2)(-25c(N-1)N+24a(a+3)+48) 5c(N-1)N(-25c(N-1)N+6a(3a+7)+24)

>

0

when c > Max{242(5a(+N1-)(12)+Na) , 6(2a5((6Na+-51))+N4)}. 

Proposition A.3. We have tP - bP

4a(4N(4N-21)+99) 15c(N-1)2 N 2

>

0

N  4. Therefore, we compare mP  with tP.

mP  - tP

1

25c(N( - 1)2 × 2(N -

N2)22((-224a54c((4N28-41-)1N0+756ca((N3a-+17))N+)

24)2

+ 12a3(3792 - 3575c(N - 1)N)

+ 2a2(25c(N - 1)N(25c(N - 1)N + 954) - 19872)

- 4a(25c(N - 1)N - 24)(575c(N - 1)N - 432)

+ (24 - 25c(N - 1)N)2(25c(N - 1)N - 16) + 12384a6

+

62208a5

)) .

This expression is greater than zero for the entire parameter
range of interest, leading the platform to always earn higher profits with its own entry. 

Proposition A.4. We can write the CS in the benchmark case and in the two cases of entry as follows:

CSb

+++(NN22x¯(bA1(12N+BN((qqNbB-2-bB((-2N1N-))x-((-1-21-0p))12bB)(xq))+bAd-Nx-p+(bBxN)2-d-px12(1bA)q))bA(d-x0(x¯1bAB-(qxbA)--xpbA-)pdbAx) dx

+

0

1 2

(qbB

-

(1

-

x)

-

pbB )

0) dx .

0

All consumers on spokes A and B buy, which leads to a

demand

of

N2 .

Also,

2 N(N-1)

mass

of

consumers

buy

from

each

of the N - 2 empty spokes as they have either A or B as their

second choice. The first constant term comes from the base

Table A.1. Equilibrium Qualities and Prices with Platform's Entry

Firm A, B P

Quality

qmi 

2(a + 4)(N - 2)(24a(a + 2) + 24 - 25c(N - 1)N) 5c(N - 1)N(6a(3a + 7) + 24 - 25c(N - 1)N)

qmP 

8(a + 1)(N - 2)(6a(a + 5) + 24 - 25c(N - 1)N) 5c(N - 1)N(6a(3a + 7) + 24 - 25c(N - 1)N)

Price

pmi 

(N - 2)(25c(N - 1)N - 24a(a + 2) - 24) 25c(N - 1)N - 6a(3a + 7) - 24

pmP 

(N - 2)(25c(N - 1)N - 6a(6a + 5) - 24) 25c(N - 1)N - 6a(3a + 7) - 24

342

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS

utility, and the rest of the terms represent the sum of the net

surplus from quality across all consumers. Similarly,

CSj

( 3
N

+

) 3(N - 3) N(N - 1)

+

2 N(N -

1)

(

xjA B

( qjA

0

-

x

-

) pjA

dx

+ + + +

N2xx¯¯x(¯(jAjB11jAN11NiB(i(((q-qq-jijijB31---)) ((((111-0--12(xxxq))))jA----pppjixjijB)))-ddd1xpx(x)jA++)



x¯ jAi

( qjA

0



x¯ jBi

( qjB

0

dx

) - x - pjA dx
) - x - pjB dx
)

+ 2 qjB - x - pjB dx + 2 qji - x - pji dx

0 1 (

0
)

 1(

)

+ 2 qjA - (1 - x) - pjA dx + 2 qjB - (1 - x) - pjB dx.



0
1

(

)) 0

+ 2 qji - (1 - x) - pji dx

0

for (i, j)  {(T, t), (P, m)}.

CSb CSt CSm

(

)



2 N

+

2(N - 2) N(N - 1)

+ (

N(32(N

-

3)

- )

3c(N - 1)(4N(4N 6c(N - 1)2N2

-

11)

+

29))

+

72

,



3 N

+

3(N - 3) N(N - 1)

+

3N(32(N

-

4)

- 5c(N - 1)(2N(2N 10c(N - 1)2N2

-

7)

+

11))

+

384 ,

and

(

)



3 N

+

3(N - 3) N(N - 1)

+

1 1(03c((3N4-561a)52(NN2-(62a)(23-a + 7) - 25c(N - 1)N + 24)2

60a4(N(c(N - 1)(2N(80N - 293) + 505)

- 480(N - 4)) - 1920) - 72a3(N(15c(N - 1)

(2N(23N - 85)+

149)-1168(N - 4)) - 4672) + 4a2(N(5c(N - 1)

(N(25c(N - 1)(2N(23N - 83) + 139)

-5844N + 22062)-

20091)+28512(N - 4)) + 114048) + 4a(25c(N

-1)N - 24)(N(5c(N - 1)(2N(52N - 187) + 311)

- 768(N - 4)) - 3072) - (24 - 25c(N - 1)N)2

(N(5c(N - 1)(2N(2N - 7) + 11)

-32(N - 4)) - 128))).

We have CSm > CSt > CSb  a > 0 and N  4. 

Appendix B

Table B.1. List of Symbols

Symbol qbi pbi bi bP qti pti ti tP qmi pmi mi

Description
Quality of firm i in the benchmark case  i  {A, B} Price of firm i in the benchmark case  i  {A, B} Profit of firm i in the benchmark case  i  {A, B} Profit of the platform in the benchmark case Quality of firm i in the third-party firm entry case
 i  {A, B, T} Price of firm i in the third-party firm entry case
 i  {A, B, T} Profit of firm i in the third-party firm entry case
 i  {A, B, T} Profit of the platform in the third-party firm entry case Quality of firm i with platform's entry  i  {A, B, P} Price of firm i with platform's entry  i  {A, B, P} Profit of firm i with platform's entry  i  {A, B, P}

Endnotes
1 For more information, please see the following: Atlanta: https:// tinyurl.com/y3terwnp, Austin: https://tinyurl.com/y37mzgr8.
2 As smartphone prices significantly vary (decline) over a product's life cycle and there may be many exogenous reasons why prices of different phones may decline at different rates, we find it better to focus on the price at the time of release for comparing prices.
3 This article, https://tinyurl.com/u4339tx, compares between the two phones on two dimensions: quality (shown in blue) and cost effectiveness based on the current price (shown in red). Because we do not want to compare pricing after phone launch, we ignore the cost effectiveness metric and focus on the quality comparison in which Pixel's overall score is 67 and Moto Z's overall score is 65.
4 For more information, see https://tinyurl.com/zx8fda7.
5 We model entry by considering multiple exogenous market structures with different numbers of firms. A similar approach has been used previously in literature (see Banker et al. 1998, Vives 2008, Arkolakis et al. 2012).
6 In Section 6.1, we extend our model to allow for market expansion.
7 This assumption seems reasonable in our context. For example, we expect that typically not many ISPs are available in a locality because of the high costs of infrastructure to provide their services. In the United States, most cities tend to have four or fewer ISP service providers, and it is, therefore, reasonable to expect consumers who want to buy ISP services can choose from only a few options rather than having a plethora of choices.
8 Although the quality of access products (q) is endogenous, we consider the quality of the platform's core service to be exogenous and fixed for the purpose of our analysis.
9 We focus on interior solutions because we are only interested in those equilibria in which all firms compete with each other and have a positive market share in each consumer segment.
10 A list of all the symbols is provided in Table B.1.
11 Note that the second-stage price expressions in Table 1 boil down to second-stage prices in the Third-party firm entry case (pti(qt) for i  {A, B, T}) if  (q) 0.

Sharma and Mehra: Platform Entry into Access Product Markets Marketing Science, 2021, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 325­343, © 2020 INFORMS
12 For more information, see https://tinyurl.com/y3terwnp. 13 Thus, the marginal value of quality for a consumer is one, and the marginal value of quality for the platform is a. Depending upon the ability of the platform to create value for advertisers and extract the surplus from them, a can be relatively high or low. 14 Later, in Section 6.2, we also consider u(q) q and (q) aq, where 0 <  < 1. We numerically verify the results we obtain with linear u(q) and (q). 15 qmA and qmB  are also lower because, from Lemma 1, we know that qmP  > qmA qmB . 16 For more information, see https://tinyurl.com/yx3mw3nq. 17 For more information, see https://broadbandnow.com/All-Providers.
References
Abhishek V, Jerath K, Zhang ZJ (2016) Agency selling or reselling? Channel structures in electronic retailing. Management Sci. 62(8):2259­2280.
Arkolakis C, Costinot A, Rodriguez-Clare A (2012) New trade models, same old gains? Amer. Econom. Rev. 102(1):94­130.
Arrow KJ (1972) Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors (Princeton University Press Palgrave, London), 219­236.
Arrow KJ (1972) Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. Rowley CK, ed. Readings in Industrial Economics (Palgrave, London), 219­236.
Banker RD, Khosla I, Sinha KK (1998) Quality and competition. Management Sci. 44(9):1179­1192.
Baumgartner J (2019) Google Fiber: A timeline of the good, the bad & the ugly. Accessed March 29, 2020, https://www.lightreading .com/services/broadband-services/google-fiber-a-timeline-of -the-good-the-bad-and-the-ugly-/a/d-id/749461.
Caminal R, Claici A (2007) Are loyalty-rewarding pricing schemes anti-competitive? Internat. J. Indust. Organ. 25(4):657­674.
Chang R (2009) Is Verizon's $23 billion bet with Fios paying off? Accessed March 28, 2020, https://adage.com/article/news/ verizon-s-23-billion-bet-fios-paying/136688.
Chen Y, Riordan MH (2007) Price and variety in the spokes model. Econom. J. (London) 117(522):897­921.
Davidson J (2015) Google Fiber has internet providers scrambling to improve their service. Accessed July 14, 2019, http://money.com/ money/3820109/google-fiber-has-internet-providers-scrambling -to-improve-their-service/.
Economides N (1999) Quality choice and vertical integration. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 17(6):903­914.
Eisenmann T, Parker G, Marshall VA (2011) Platform envelopment. Strategic Management J. 32(12):1270­1285.
Filloux F (2019) The ARPUs of the big four dwarf everybody else. Accessed March 29, 2020, https://mondaynote.com/the-arpus-of -the-big-four-dwarf-everybody-else-e5b02a579ed3.

343
Gabbert E (2017) 2013 Q1 Google earnings call reveals real reason for Google Fiber? Accessed February 3, 2018, https://www .wordstream.com/blog/ws/2013/04/18/q1-google-earnings -call-google-fiber.
Goettler RL, Gordon BR (2011) Does AMD spur Intel to innovate more? J. Political Econom. 119(6):1141­1200.
Ha A, Long X, Nasiry J (2016) Quality in supply chain encroachment. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 18(2):280­298.
Hagiu A, Spulber D (2013) First-party content and coordination in two-sided markets. Management Sci. 59(4):933­949.
Hagiu A, Wright J (2015) Multi-sided platforms. Internat. J. Indust. Organ. 43(C):162­174.
Lee RS (2013) Vertical integration and exclusivity in platform and two-sided markets. Amer. Econom. Rev. 103(7):2960­3000.
Levin B, Downes L (2018) Why Google Fiber is high-speed internet's most successful failure. Accessed June 3, 2019, https:// hbr.org/2018/09/why-google-fiber-is-high-speed-internets-most -successful-failure.
Ma CTA, Burgess JF (1993) Quality competition, welfare, and regulation. J. Econom. 58(2):153­173.
McCann J (2018) Google Pixel review. Accessed March 2, 2020, https://www.techradar.com/reviews/google-pixel-review.
Perloff JM, Salop SC (1985) Equilibrium with product differentiation. Rev. Econom. Stud. 52(1):107­120.
Parker GG, Van Alstyne MW (2005) Two-sided network effects: A theory of information product design. Management Sci. 51(10): 1494­1504.
Rochet JC, Tirole J (2003) Platform competition in two-sided markets. J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 1(4):990­1029.
Schulz N, Stahl K (1996) Do consumers search for the highest price? Oligopoly equilibrium and monopoly optimum in differentiatedproducts markets. RAND J. Econom. 27(3):542­562.
Schumpeter J (1942) Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (Harper, New York).
Swider M (2017) Moto Z review. Accessed March 2, 2020, https:// www.techradar.com/reviews/phones/mobile-phones/moto-z -1323027/review.
Tirole J (1988) The Theory of Industrial Organization (The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Turk V (2017) Facebook banks on virtual reality as the future of socialising. Accessed January 21, 2018, https://www.newscientist .com/article/2128391-facebook-banks-on-virtual-reality-as-the -future-of-socialising/.
Vives X (2008) Innovation and competitive pressure. J. Indust. Econom. 56(3):419­469.
Wolinsky A (1997) Regulation of duopoly: Managed competition vs regulated monopolies. J. Econom. Management Strategy 6(4): 821­847.
Yalcin T, Ofek E, Koenigsberg O, Biyalogorsky E (2013) Complementary goods: Creating, capturing, and competing for value. Marketing Sci. 32(4):554­569.

