Vol. 32, No. 3, May­June 2013, pp. 488­509 ISSN 0732-2399 (print) ISSN 1526-548X (online)

http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2013.0775 © 2013 INFORMS

Category Positioning and Store Choice:
The Role of Destination Categories
Richard A. Briesch, William R. Dillon, Edward J. Fox
Edwin L. Cox School of Business, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas 75275 {rbriesch@cox.smu.edu, bdillon@cox.smu.edu, efox@cox.smu.edu}
We focus on destination categories, so named because they have the greatest impact on where households choose to shop and, more generally, on how category positioning affects which store a household chooses. We propose a reduced-form model-based analytical approach to identify categories that fill the destination role. Our approach determines which categories are most important to shoppers' store choice decisions and helps determine in which categories the retailer provides superior value. In addition, our approach allows us to understand the impact of the retailer's long-run merchandising policy decisions on the value it provides. Previous store choice research considered the effects of pricing, assortment and other merchandising decisions at the store level but did not focus on the effect of specific categories on store choice. This focus leads us to formulate a model that can (1) measure and explain the differential impact that specific categories have on shoppers' store choice decisions and (2) measure the relative value of retailers' category offerings, partitioning that value into the component resulting from retailer merchandising and the component that is nonmerchandising related. The model form captures differences in category value across stores (i.e., the store's category positioning) by specifying a spatial model for the store choice and category incidence intercepts. Our spatial model recognizes that stores position their offering vis-à-vis the category ideal based on long-run category merchandising decisions and that not all categories have the same importance in store choice decisions. We explore these issues for five retailers in the Charlotte, North Carolina market. We find that (1) category impact on store choice is highly skewed; (2) although categories with higher sales generally have a higher impact on store choice decisions, there are exceptions; (3) impact on store choice decisions does not vary systematically by the type of category (e.g., perishable versus dry grocery); and (4) our measure of category impact on store choice, although correlated with the category development index between retailers, is superior in that it provides a basis for comparing category impact within a retailer and how relative category value, based on long-run merchandising decisions, attracts shoppers to a store.
Key words: category positioning; category and store choice modeling; spatial modeling History: Received: November 7, 2011; accepted: November 12, 2012; Preyas Desai served as the editor-in-chief
and Gary Russell served as associate editor for this article. Published online in Articles in Advance March 21, 2013.

1. Introduction
A fundamental tenet of category management is that individual categories play different roles. The most widely used taxonomy identifies categories for the "destination," "routine," "occasional/seasonal" or "convenience" role. These consumer-based roles help retailers "understand how consumers view the category" (Blattberg et al. 1995, p. 22), which should enable retailers to manage "categories according to their importance to consumers" (ACNielsen 2006, p. 79). Surprisingly, these consumer-based category roles are described not from the consumer's perspective but by the "positioning the retailer should take based on the category's importance to the consumer" (Blattberg et al. 1995, p. 23, emphasis added). The common thinking is that categories should be managed according to their roles, thereby enabling retailers to use their product offering like a portfolio that attracts shoppers while profitably generating revenues.

Our focus is on destination categories, so named because they have the greatest impact on where households choose to shop and, more generally, on how category positioning (e.g., long-run merchandising policies) affects which store a household chooses. In other words, we are interested in which specific categories drive store choice decisions and how retailer merchandising influences those categories.
To our knowledge, no definitive definition of destination categories exists, yet destination categories have been discussed in the context of the different roles that categories play. For example, the Joint Industry Project on Efficient Consumer Reponse states in its original category management report that a destination category is "to be the primary category provider and help define the retailer as the store of choice by delivering consistent, superior target customer value" (Food Marketing Institute 1993, p. 26). Two implications of this statement help us understand

488

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

489

the meaning of a destination category. First, being the primary provider suggests that the retailer is the store of choice, so destination categories should drive store traffic. Second, to be the store of choice requires that the retailer deliver more value in the category than its competitors do. Although retailers can allocate resources in an attempt to create destination categories, it is ultimately the shopper who determines whether the retailer is offering superior value in a particular category. We discuss the concept of destination categories in more depth in §3.
1.1. Objectives In this paper, we propose a reduced-form modelbased analytical approach to identifying categories that play the destination role. Because our model focuses on how shoppers respond to retailers' marketing mix decisions--not retailer decision making-- it allows us to determine which categories are most important to shoppers' store choice decisions and which retailers provide superior value in different categories.1 Our approach also allows us to understand the impact of a retailer's long-run merchandising policy decisions on the value it provides; specifically, we formulate a model that can (1) measure and explain the differential impact of specific categories on shoppers' store choice decisions and (2) measure the relative value of retailers' category offerings, partitioning that value into the component resulting from retailer merchandising and the component that is not merchandising related. This value partitioning clarifies the contribution of a retailer's merchandising to the value of its category offerings. It is also important to note that although previous store choice research focused on the effects of pricing, assortment, and other merchandising decisions at the store level, it did not consider the effect of specific categories on store choice.
To understand the role of category positioning in store choice, we formulate a mixed nested logit model that incorporates both store choice and category incidence decisions in a way that captures the effect of a store's weekly category merchandising decisions, as well as its long-run merchandising policies, on the probability of choosing that store. This reduced-form model of shopping behavior captures differences in category value across stores by specifying a spatial model for the store choice and category incidence intercepts. The store choice intercepts position each store in latent multiattribute space on the basis of store characteristics and the value that the store provides to consumers across all categories. The category

incidence intercepts are parameterized in terms of the spatial distance between a household's perception of stores' offerings in a category and the household's ideal point for that category--in other words, the distance between what stores offer in a specific category and what the household wants in that category. Thus, our spatial model recognizes that stores can position their offerings vis-à-vis the category ideal based on long-run category merchandising decisions and that not all categories have the same importance in store choice decisions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly reviews the extant literature and positions our work relative to this literature. The concept of a destination category is discussed in §3 and is specifically related to category development measures (i.e., category development indices, or CDIs). Section 4 presents two conceptual frameworks that explain how category incidence (conditional on the shopper visiting the store) is used to estimate category utility; these two conceptual frameworks guide our model specification. The store choice and category incidence component models are presented in §5, where we also explain how these model intercepts are parameterized and offer a baseline model that can be used to assess the usefulness of the proposed spatial representation. Section 6 discusses estimation issues. Our data set is described in §7. Modeling results follow in §8. Section 9 presents a policy analysis that investigates the impact of categories on store choice. We end with a discussion of limitations and avenues for future research.
2. Background and Contribution
Explaining store choice decisions has been of great interest to academics and practitioners alike. Researchers have studied a wide variety of factors that may influence a consumer's decision about where to shop including pricing, promotion, feature advertising, assortment, retail price format (HiLo versus everyday low pricing (EDLP)), shopping basket size and composition, travel distance/time, prior shopping experiences, the need for variety, shoppers' fixed and variable costs, cherry-picking, and household characteristics.2
This study contributes to the extant literature on store choice in a number of important ways.
· First, unlike previous store choice research, our primary interest is to understand the role that specific categories play in store choice decisions. To our

1 For this reason we do not claim to recommend categories that the retailer could or should develop to serve the destination role. As we discuss in this section, and in more detail in §4, we specify a reduced-form model conditioned on current strategic retailer decisions, and consequently, we focus only on identifying categories that currently play the destination role.

2 Representative papers include Reilly (1931), Baumol and Ide (1956), Huff (1964), Arnold et al. (1978, 1981), Arnold and Tigert (1982), Arnold et al. (1983), Broniarczyk et al. (2006), Chernev et al. (2003), Chernev and Hamilton (2009), Bell et al. (1998), Bell and Lattin (1998), Rhee and Bell (2002), Fox and Hoch (2005), Briesch et al. (2009), and Zhang et al. (2010).

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

490

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

knowledge, this is the first study to (1) address conceptually and empirically the issue of destination categories and (2) isolate the differential effects of category positioning decisions on store choice.
· Second, because we incorporate a spatial model of household preferences in which stores and categories are positioned in multiattribute space, we can assess the extent to which different categories drive store choice decisions. Furthermore, we show how the positions of a given store and category in multiattribute space reflect the value of the store's category offering.
· Third, in contrast to Bell et al. (1998) and Briesch et al. (2009), we do not adopt a shopping list metaphor or need-based approach to category incidence. By not conditioning on a shopping list or on category needs, we capture all purchase incidences and can therefore account for impulse purchases.3
· Fourth, we explicitly model both store choice and category incidence and consider a large number of categories (i.e., 80) in multiple retail formats (grocery and supercenter).
· Finally, in contrast to the earlier literature that either assumed that category value did not vary across consumers (e.g., Baumol and Ide 1956, Huff 1964) or allowed categories to have differential appeal across shoppers based on an unobserved shopping list or predetermined set of needs (e.g., Bell et al. 1998, Briesch et al. 2009), we allow stores to differentiate their category offerings based on assortment and other long-run merchandising policies. We find that categories do not necessarily have the same importance in store choice decisions. Holding price and promotion constant, the likelihood of category purchase depends on which store a shopper chooses.
3. Destination Categories and CDIs
3.1. Destination Categories ACNielsen (2006) proposes an analytical basis for category role selection in which the first question to be answered is how important the category is to consumers. ACNielsen argues that high category importance is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for a destination category. The retailer must also provide superior value in the category based on merchandising effort--in particular, product assortment.
Adopting this perspective, the retailer selects categories for the destination role.4 That selection
3 To be clear, although we capture multiple store visits, we do not explicitly model this behavior.
4 Our focus is not on how a retailer selects a category for the destination role, but rather on identifying which categories have assumed that role.

influences retailer actions, in particular merchandising (including product assortment) decisions. However, whether a category selected for the destination role achieves its objectives for the retailer is ultimately determined by consumers. They are the ones who determine the value a retailer is delivering in a specific category and where they will shop.5 Although we can assume that all categories influence store choice to varying degrees, a destination category disproportionally increases the likelihood of a store being chosen because that store offers consumers superior value in the category. Following first-order principles, we capture value by estimating the utility that a shopper derives from a category at each store. As we discuss in §§4 and 5, the utility that a consumer derives from a category is determined by the attractiveness of that category at a specific store, along with other factors including category needs and in-store factors that influence the consumer while shopping.
Continuing with first-order principles, the more attractive the category is at a store, the higher the probability that a consumer chooses that store. Attractiveness is defined in terms of a long-run merchandising score that reflects how well positioned a category is relative to what consumers want in that category. The purpose of the merchandising score is to move the position of a store based on the perceived attractiveness of the store's long-run merchandising policies. The tacit assumption is that the smaller the distance between a store's location, adjusted for its merchandising attractiveness and what consumers want in a category, the higher the probability of shoppers choosing that store and the more that category plays the destination role for this retailer.
To fix ideas, in this paper we define a destination category as one that (1) substantially affects store choice decisions and (2) delivers superior value (at least in part) as a result of the retailers' longrun merchandising decisions. Thus, destination categories are jointly determined by the retailer and the consumer, in the sense that the retailer anticipates or responds to consumers' category preferences. Accordingly, the retailer does not select categories to serve in the destination role; rather, the retailer identifies categories that motivate and attract consumers. Note that we define a destination category as one that increases store traffic, not in terms of how much a consumer purchases while shopping. This perspective is consistent with the view taken by practitioners. Obviously,
5 A brand manager can be thought of as playing a role similar to the retailer. The brand manager determines a brand's value proposition, one that they hope will resonate with consumers. However, it is consumers who ultimately determine whether the value proposition is relevant and believable and whether they will purchase the brand.

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

491

retailers welcome larger basket sizes and/or basket expenditures. However, interviews with category managers at large retailers revealed that higher category purchase quantities are associated with other category roles; these include commonly defined roles such as "routine" and "seasonal" as well as retailerdefined roles such as "basket builder" and "impulse." By contrast, the ability to drive store traffic was the most distinguishing feature of destination categories cited by the retail managers. Specific responses included that such categories "are trip drivers," "can be a traffic driver," and "can increase awareness and customer count."6
Our perspective that destination categories result in large measure from a retailer's long-run merchandising decisions has two salutary benefits. First, such decisions can be differentiated from short-run merchandising decisions (e.g., feature advertising) that may also increase store traffic. Second, this definition mitigates possible endogeneity concerns, as long-run decisions are, by definition, independent of short-run shocks to the system. In other words, strategic reactions by retailers to shopper behavior operate over a longer time frame, so it is possible to condition on current retailer behavior and then build a consumer model, relative to this conditioning.
Our empirical analysis will consider only categories that are offered by the five retailers in our sample, but in principle, this need not be the case.7 To identify a category as playing the destination role, we must demonstrate that the category influences store choice and, just as important, that the long-run merchandising policies have created value as evinced by the level of attractiveness consumers place on the category. As we demonstrate in §5, our modeling framework, which adopts a spatial parameterization for the store and category intercepts, allows us to estimate the utility that the shopper derives from a category and the impact that category utility--in particular, category merchandising--has on store choice decisions.
3.2. Category Development Index One measure that has been proposed as an indicator of shoppers' preference for a specific category at a specific retailer is the category development index (CDI). At an aggregate level, the CDI reflects the preference of shoppers to purchase specific categories at one retailer (rather than at others) and is defined as the retailer's share in a particular category divided by its overall market share, multiplied by 100 (e.g., Dhar et al. 2001). Table 1 presents the CDIs of 80 product categories for five retail chains in the Charlotte,
6 Information on our interviews with retail category managers can be obtained by contacting the third author.
7 However, in such a case, the determination of value would be difficult to assess under quasi-monopolistic conditions.

Table 1 Category CDIs

Category

Food Harris WinnBI-LO Lion Teeter Dixie Walmart

Carbonated beverages

127 102 115 121

70

Cigarettes

93 229

8

53

51

Cold cereal

105 96 128

98

84

FZ dinners/entrees

109 113 125

99

62

Fresh bread and rolls

101 98 140 111

65

Salty snacks

110 104 114 103

73

Beer/ale/alcoholic cider

97 158 72

90

64

Milk

127 105 108 116

68

Natural cheese

118 105 113 127

63

Cookies

94 96 126 101

85

Crackers

89 106 116

93

90

Luncheon meats

123 128 90 136

58

Breakfast meats

102 107 113 143

64

Total chocolate candy

61 65 82

64

187

Dog food

105 96 72

75

130

Ice cream/sherbet

100 114 160 116

34

FZ pizza

139 104 141

82

53

FZ poultry

83 73 140

93

68

Cat food

127 125 70

92

89

Soup

112 113 130 113

52

Coffee

95 96 94 120

81

RFG salad/coleslaw

134 97 129 133

55

Pet supplies

33 32 27

51

299

Processed cheese

136 116 88 122

61

Wine

54 127 117

63

59

Laundry detergent

89 96 101

70

94

Vegetables

138 129 97 130

43

Toilet tissue

96 96 94

97

99

FZ seafood

206 78 99 192

26

Snack bars/granola bars

98 78 87

78

124

Total nonchocolate candy

51 73 57

90

187

FZ novelties

118 123 129 109

42

Paper towels

83 103 94 115

99

Household cleaner

70 74 89

74

162

Dry packaged dinners

143 112 98

93

76

Internal analgesics

82 55 50

92

203

Dough/biscuit dough--RFG 104 102 136 142

54

Frankfurters

122 117 119 132

46

Vitamins

40 33 21

20

285

RFG juices/drinks

93 104 144 102

64

Yogurt

79 69 174

74

100

Bottled water

73 44 146

73

140

Soap

62 62 56

75

204

Toothpaste

82 50 94

92

186

Pastry/doughnuts

100 98 150

71

70

Cold/allergy/sinus tablets

69 47 59

53

237

Salad dressings--SS

133 110 115 114

57

FZ plain vegetables

136 95 160 100

42

Canned/bottled fruit

104 108 133 106

63

Snack nuts/seeds/corn nuts 69 93 85

80

122

Baking mixes

139 107 109 129

61

Bottled juices--SS

94 123 108 102

63

Skin care

34 20 43

34

321

FZ breakfast food

101 114 136 113

51

FZ bread/FZ dough

96 122 134 122

42

Canned meat

144 111 67 145

68

FZ meat

88 60 221

85

53

Dish detergent

69 78 126

91

101

Spices/seasonings

97 97 116 105

75

Cups and plates

77 78 83 113

123

FZ appetizers/snack rolls

88 96 106 162

60

RFG fresh eggs

115 95 123 134

70

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

492

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

Table 1 (Cont'd.)

Category

Food Harris WinnBI-LO Lion Teeter Dixie Walmart

Shampoo

76 47 48 90 236

Batteries

66 36 58 75 252

Pickles/relish/olives

108 94 138 137

52

Margarine/spreads/butter

101 107 102 144

84

Dinner sausage

130 94 118 188

50

Deodorant

73 53 71 81 212

FZ desserts/topping

84 115 124 180

43

Shortening and oil

119 110 97 111

65

Baking needs

122 100 113 95

82

SS dinners

148 129 91 105

56

Toaster pastries/tarts

156 83 123 89

86

Air fresheners

80 70 71 84 191

Toothbrush/dental accessories 68 36 47 59 247

Food and trash bags

77 87 98 81 112

Spaghetti/Italian sauce

117 103 137 128

52

Sanitary napkins/tampons

78 72 85 49 180

Seafood--SS

127 107 99 114

60

Peanut butter

106 110 100 104

80

Note. FZ, frozen; RFG, refrigerated; SS, shelf stable.

North Carolina market. These chains and product categories will be the focus of the empirical analysis that follows in §8. CDIs can vary markedly across retail chains, as is the case for the five retail chains shown in Table 1. Although CDIs can undoubtedly identify store-by-category differences, they provide little insight into the reasons for, or consequences of, these differences for the following reasons.
· First, CDIs provide no information about the importance of different categories in store choice decisions, a key consideration in the identification of destination categories. For example, categories with high purchase frequency and/or that represent a high annual expenditure may have greater impact on store choice.
· Second, CDIs provide no insights as to the value added by the retailer's long-run merchandising policies. In contrast, our model framework separates factors that the shopper knows before choosing a store, which reflect a store's long-run category assortment and merchandising policies, from those that are only observable after choosing the store, i.e., while shopping.
· Third, CDIs have limited explanatory value; a high CDI (>100) might indicate that the category is a complement to other categories that actually influenced the store choice decision (see, for example, Manchanda et al. 1999), or it might indicate that the category is a complement to other purchases that were made because of advertised prices.
· Finally, because CDIs are neither household- nor time-specific, they are not at all informative as to which store a household may choose on any given shopping trip.

As we demonstrate in §9, our model form allows us to derive a metric that is highly correlated with CDIs across a store (within a category) but that remedies these limitations.
4. Conceptual Framework
It is well known that modeling store choice presents substantial challenges. Consider that the expected costs of shopping at each store, and hence the probability of choosing each store, depends on the shopper's intended purchases. Yet purchase intentions, reflected in either a shopping list (Bell et al. 1998) or a priori category needs (Briesch et al. 2009), are not observed--they must be inferred from actual purchases. Actual purchases, however, include both intended and unplanned purchases (see Bell et al. 1998, p. 354 for a detailed discussion). Unplanned purchases are made as a result of in-store displays and promotions (Kollat and Willett 1967), but shoppers are not exposed to these in-store stimuli until after they have chosen a store. Moreover, in-store stimuli are specific to a store, so unplanned purchases are dependent on which store is chosen.
To address this challenge, we will model observed purchases in such a way that intended and unplanned purchases are partitioned. Specifically, information that shoppers know prior to choosing a store will be reflected in the intended purchase probability, whereas in-store displays and promotions--to which shoppers are exposed only after choosing a store-- will be reflected in the unplanned purchase probability. Note that these purchase probabilities will be modeled at the category, rather than the stock-keeping unit (SKU) level. In this way, we parsimoniously capture a store's diverse product offerings while avoiding the complexity of cross-product effects within categories and incorporate retailers' assortment policies, which are only relevant at the category level. Finally, we use intended category purchase probability and other relevant factors to estimate the utility that the shopper derives from each category, which is then incorporated directly into the store choice model. Note that the uncertainty of purchase intentions will be taken into account by estimating the category purchase (i.e., category incidence) and store choice models simultaneously.
To better illustrate our proposed approach and, specifically, how we will use category incidence (conditional on the shopper visiting the store) to estimate category utility, Figure 1 provides two conceptual frameworks. Figure 1, panel A, is representative of the mental model (we hypothesize) that shoppers use in deciding which store to visit, and panel B translates the shopper's conceptual framework into elements that are more closely aligned with the model proposed in the next section.

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

Figure 1

Conceptual Frameworks: (A) Conceptual Consumer Model and (B) Conceptual Modeling Framework

Panel A

Consumer assesses category needs
Consumer "evaluates" a store with respect to the categories
of need

Need assessment can be driven by a number of factors (e.g., inventory assessment, or "looking in the pantry").
Attractiveness is determined by what the consumer wants to purchase in a category and what the store offers (i.e., assortment and merchandising-related factors).

Needs and category attractiveness are not directly observable.

Consumer assigns a weight to each category that reflects
the importance of the category

This weight is a function of a number of factors: (e.g., money spent in the category, average time between purchases in the category).

Consumer "computes" the composite utility of the "basket" for each store
Consumer compares the basket utility with store-specific "shopping costs"
Consumer selects the store to visit that maximizes net utility
Once at the store, in-store merchandising influences
category purchases

Store-specific costs include travel distance to the store, store loyalty, and category-specific store preference.
Category incidence is observed

Category incidence is used to identify these constructs.

Lagged purchase quantity

Time since last category
purchase

Time x Qnty interaction

Panel B Feature

Day of week

493

Category incidence In-store factors

Category A needs
SSCV Store Z Category A
Store Y Category A
Store X Category A Attraction

Category importance
score

$Spend
APT Store choice

Store fixed costs

Price

Display

Loyalty

Travel distance
(log)

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

494

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

4.1. Conceptual Shopper Model As depicted in panel A of Figure 1, the process begins with the shopper recognizing one or more category needs. He or she then, either consciously or unconsciously, evaluates each store's offering in the categories of need. In essence, this involves an evaluation of what the shopper wants to purchase and what the store offers. It is important to note that this evaluation reflects what the shopper knows before choosing a store--each store's long-run category assortment and merchandising policies, not the actual displays and (unadvertised) prices, which are only observable after choosing the store. In addition, the shopper weighs the importance of individual categories in satisfying his or her needs. These importance weights reflect the fact that certain categories may have a greater impact on store choice. At this point, the shopper is in a position to assess the total basket utility that he or she would derive from purchasing at each store under consideration. To determine which store to visit, the shopper compares the store-specific total basket utility with store-specific shopping costs. The shopper then chooses the store that maximizes his or her net utility, which in turn determines which instore stimuli he or she sees and hence whether category purchases are consummated. Recall that only the household's category purchases (incidence) are observed, not the household's category needs or the store-specific category value. In our model, category needs and store-specific category value are identified by the household's category purchases.
4.2. Conceptual Modeling Framework The modeling framework shown in panel B of Figure 1 adds further specificity to the shopper model described above. In the figure, ovals depict inherently unobservable factors (i.e., constructs) and squares depict observable variables. We see that factors hypothesized to affect category incidence are divided into those that influence the shopper prior to visiting a store (category needs and store-specific category value, labeled SSCV in the figure) and those that are experienced while shopping (Price and Display). We use inventory-related variables such as Time since last category purchase and Lagged purchase quantity, whether the households' favorite brands are advertised as Features, as well as the Day of the week the shopping trip took place to operationalize category needs. Inventory assessment and feature advertising occur prior to the store visit; the day of the week that the shopping trip took place provides information about the type of trip planned--stock-up/major versus fill-in (Kahn and Schmittlein 1989, Kim and Park 1997). And, as detailed in §5.1.1, we develop a spatial model to estimate the store-specific category value by reparameterizing the intercept term in the

category incidence model. Store choice is hypothesized to be a function of category needs, store-specific category value, and store-specific fixed costs. However, the effects of category needs and store-specific category value are weighted by the importance of the category to the shopper, which, following ACNielsen (2006), is hypothesized to depend on the amount of money spent ($Spend) in the category and average time between category purchases (APT).
4.3. Comment We acknowledge that there is a conditioning or endogeneity problem inherent in the notion of a destination category, given the dependency between observed purchases and store choice. Although we do not explicitly address the endogeneity issue, note the following. First, as discussed above we distinguish between factors that shoppers experience (or are exposed to) before choosing a store and after they are at the store, i.e., while shopping. Second, we adopt a utility maximizing approach as opposed to a cost minimization approach, as implemented by Bell et al. (1998) and Briesch et al. (2009).8 Because we focus on utility maximization, we do not need to estimate the quantity that the household plans to buy because we do not calculate category costs, but rather we focus on category attractiveness.9 Third, although our model form requires (via the conditioning argument) that a household be in the store to make a purchase, the conditioning is used only to estimate the attractiveness of the category; it is not assumed to be part of the household decision process. In our analysis, we consider the 80 largest of the 290 categories for which we have detailed price information. Consequently, there is no binding constraint that the household must purchase in one of the 80 largest categories given that they selected a store to visit. Finally, there is another reason to view this putative endogeneity problem as perhaps less severe. Although to some extent store positioning resulting from category merchandising may impact store choice, it is unlikely that retailers can respond to consumer purchasing patterns by changing product assortments in the short run, i.e., weekly. Rather, it is more likely that the majority of category merchandising and product assortment policies are fixed over short periods. In other words, it takes retailers longer to understand how category positioning might be changed to impact store choice. This argument is similar to the rationale for treating prices as exogenous. Retailers cannot detect consumers' responses to prices quickly enough to influence weekly pricing decisions (see Erdem et al. 2006).
8 Utility maximization is the dual of cost minimization.
9 As discussed in §2, this also relieves the need to adopt a shopping list metaphor (Bell et al. 1998) or need-based approach (Briesch et al. 2009).

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

495

5. Model Forms

5.1. Category Incidence Model The indirect utility for household h purchasing category c on trip t (at store s can be written as

UhCsct = VhCsct +

C hsct

(1)

where VhCsct denotes the deterministic component of utility. Consistent with our conceptual modeling framework, we partition the deterministic component of the utility of purchasing in the category in terms of category needs, in-store factors, and store-specific category value as follows:

VhCsct = hsct + 0hc + 1hcTimehsct + 2hcQntyhsct-1 + 3hcTimehsct × Qntyhsct-1 + 4hcFAdvhsct + 5hcWKEndhct + 6hcPricesct + 7hcDisphsct (2)

In Equation (2), the first five covariates relate to factors that influence a household before shopping and which assist in determining the household's category needs:
Time = The number of days since the household last purchased in the category.
Qnty = Quantity purchased in a category on last visit.
Time × Qnty = The mean-centered interaction of number of days since the last purchase and the quantity last purchased.
FAdv = The proportion of each household's three favorite brands that are feature advertised at store s during trip t, weighted by the brands' share of household category purchases during the 26-week initialization period.
WKEnd = A dummy variable equal to 1 if the shopping trip occurred between Friday and Sunday; 0 otherwise.
The last two covariates in Equation (2) are in-store factors that influence the consumer while shopping:

Price = The average price of those brands in the category that are carried by all stores, weighted by each brand's long-run market share of the category (see Ainslie and Rossi 1998).
Disp = The proportion of each household's three favorite brands that are displayed at store s during trip t, weighted by the brands' share of household category purchases during the 26-week initialization period.
With respect to parameters, hsct denotes storespecific category value (see Figure 1), which indicates how attractive category c at store s is for household h (how this parameter is estimated will be explained

in the next section); 0hc represents the (estimated) baseline purchase frequency for the category, which accounts for differences in frequency of category purchases when estimating spatial parameters (spatial parameters will be discussed below); and, jhc, j = 1 2 7, reflect the impact of each covariate on the indirect utility of purchasing in category c, where

we assume a variance components representation for these effects:

jhc = j + c + h

(3)

In Equation (3), j gives the mean impact of covariate j, c gives the variance across categories, and h gives the variance across households.
Note that we selected the covariates appearing in Equation (2) on the basis of our conceptual model framework, which partitions factors that could possibly influence category purchases and store choice based on whether the shopper experiences those factors before or after entering the store. There are, however, several covariates that warrant further discussion.
Because category needs depend on household inventory levels and the rate at which the inventory is consumed, we need to operationalize these variables; we use lagged quantity and time since last category purchase (and their interaction) as surrogates for these inventory levels, respectively, which is consistent with the extant literature (see, for example, Erdem et al. 2003, Briesch et al. 2009, Hendel and Nevo 2009). Accordingly, we expect that the probability of category purchase is negatively related to quantity last purchased and positively related to time since the most recent category purchase (Chib et al. 2004). We include WKEnd to account for the different shopping behaviors that are known to be associated with weekday and weekend trips; in particular, basket sizes on weekend trips are generally larger than basket sizes on weekday trips (see Kahn and Schmittlein 1989, McAlister et al. 2009). Thus, WKEnd is a plausible surrogate for both basket size and basket expenditure as well as other behaviors driven by the type of trip, i.e., stock up (major) versus fill in.
Finally, we chose not to model basket dollar expenditure directly for two reasons. First, our interviews with retail category managers indicated that destination categories are associated with driving traffic to the store as opposed to increasing basket size or basket dollar expenditure. Second, we performed a natural experiment in which we conditioned CDIs according to a household's basket expenditure; in other words, we recalculated the CDIs in Table 1 conditioning on high versus low dollar category spend (detailed results are in the Web appendix, available as supplemental material at http://dx.doi.org/

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

496

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

10.1287/mksc.2013.0775).10 The differences are, for the most part, quite small, and there appears to be no systematic pattern to suggest that category dollar expenditures are driving category incidence. Although we do not explicitly include category dollar expenditure in the category incidence model, we recognize that category dollar spend may influence the importance of a category in driving store choice decisions. We discuss this issue in §5.2.

5.1.1. Category Attraction Parameter. To allow store choice to be influenced by what the shopper wants vis-à-vis what stores offer in a category, we adopt an ideal point representation for hsct, the storespecific category value, which gives the attraction of category c at store s for household h. Accordingly, we define hsct as

hsct =

wd

sd +

hscdt -

I2 hcd

(4)

d

where

sd = the location of store s on latent attribute dimension d,

wd = the importance weight of latent attribute dimension d,

I hcd

=

household

hs

ideal

point

for

category

c

on

latent attribute dimension d, and

hscdt = long-run merchandising score for household h of category c at store s during trip t on latent

attribute dimension d.

In the interest of parsimony, hscdt is defined as a linear composite of long-run merchandising covariates such
that

hscdt = b1hdFavhsct + b2hdNUPCsct + b3hdNBrdsct
+b4hdNSizesct + b5hd%PLsct + b6hd%Natlsct
+b7hdAdvFsct +b8hdDispFsct +b9hdAvgPricesct (5)
where
Fav = Favorite brand availability--the summation of the purchase shares of the top three brands for the household if the brand is sold in store s during period t or is 0 otherwise;
NUPC = The number of universal product codes (UPCs) per brand available at store s in category c during trip t divided by the average number of UPCs per brand carried by all stores in all periods;
NBrd = The number of brands available at store s in category c during trip t divided by the average number of brands carried by all stores in category c over all periods;

10 We used median dollar category expenditure to form the high versus low household groups for each retailer.

NSize = The number of sizes per brand available at store s during trip t divided by the average number of sizes per brand for all stores over all periods;
%PL = the percentage of private label UPCs available in category c at store s during trip t;
%Natl = the percentage of national brand UPCs available in category c at store s during trip t;
AdvF = the frequency of brand advertisements-- the number of weeks that at least one SKU in the brand was feature advertised divided by the total number of weeks;
DispF = the frequency of displays--the number of weeks that at least one SKU in the category was on display divided by the total number of weeks;
AvgPrice = the average volume-weighted prices across all SKUs in a category; and
bkhd = the component weight for long-run merchandising covariate k for household h on dimension d.
We use the first 26 weeks of data to initialize each covariate and then apply a 26-week window to assess availability. For example, if we observe that a respondents' favorite brand is available at store s, say, at week 2, we assume that the brand was also available in weeks 3­28. With the exception of AvgPrice, all of these merchandising covariates have been investigated in the context of the impact of assortments on store choice (see Briesch et al. 2009) and so are included in this study. However, in this study, we are interested in the longer-run impact of each covariate because we believe that consumers develop beliefs about store and category positioning based on their collective shopping experiences. We have included AvgPrice because the longer-run pricing practices of retailers play a role in shaping category perceptions as well; for example, EDLP versus HiLo.
Note that the role of hscdt, the long-run merchandising score, in our modeling framework is to move the position of store s on dimension d based on the perceived attractiveness of store s's long-run merchandising policies in category c. The tacit assumption is that the smaller the distance between the store's location (adjusted for merchandising attractiveness) and the category ideal point, the higher the probability of choosing that store. The magnitude and statistical significance of each component weight associated with a long-run merchandising covariate (bkhd) indicates the extent to which the covariate impacts the composite and, perhaps more importantly, the covariate's role in displacing a store along each latent attribute dimension. In other words, we will use the component weights to "adjust" the store's position on the latent

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

497

attribute dimensions. Note also that (1) AdvF and

DispF are incorporated in the merchandising score but

only as long-term frequencies (see Ainslie and Rossi

1998), and (2) in deriving the store locations ( sd) and

category ideal points (

I hcd

),

we

remove

the

baseline

category purchase frequencies ( 0hc) so that the impact

of assortment and merchandising is independent of

how often the household purchases in the category.

We establish the conditions for identification of the

spatial parameters below (proofs are available in the

Web appendix).

Finally, we would argue that the merchandising

and product assortment variables (and their defini-

tions) that appear in Equation (5) reasonably capture

a retailer's merchandising and product assortment

decisions and are similar to the operationalizations

used by others (e.g., Boatwright and Nunes 2001,

Briesch et al. 2009); however, we recognize that these

covariates may not be reflective of how households

encode category information or form impressions

about categories. For example, Hoch et al. (1999)

present an interesting approach to capturing how

households perceive the "variety" of an assortment.

Their approach, however, is best suited to studies that

consider a small number of items per category, unlike

the present study, because it is based on computing

the psychological distance between all items in a cate-

gory (i.e., all pairwise comparisons).11 We discuss this

limitation of the current study further in §10.

5.1.2. Identification Conditions for Spatial Parameters. To identify the spatial parameters, i.e., store locations ( sd) and category ideal points ( Ihcd), we use category purchase incidence data along with a number of identifying constraints. In this section we provide general identification conditions. Conditions for identification of a k-dimensional solution rely on the identifying restrictions associated with the k - 1 dimensional solution (see the Web appendix for proofs).
Condition 1. The weights for the dimensions are set to -1 for all dimensions. This identifies the scale of the map and ensures that all dimensions have the same scale.
Condition 2. One store is located at the origin (or the stores are centered at the origin; i.e., the sum of the store positions on each dimension add to 0). This restriction provides translational invariance for the stores and helps identify the category intercepts.
Condition 3. One category is located at the origin (or the categories are centered at the origin; i.e., the sum

11 Another interesting approach is presented by Morales et al. (2005), who capture how a consumer organizes category assortment internally. We thank a reviewer for raising this issue and pointing us to the work of Hoch et al. (1999) and Morales et al. (2005).

of the category positions on each dimension add to 0).

This restriction provides translational invariance for

the categories and helps identify the category inter-

cepts and other store positions.

Condition 4. For each dimension d, s=d+1 d > 0. This restriction provides rotational invariance for the

dimensions.

Condition 5. For each dimension d, s=d+1 j = 0 and

I h

c=d+1

j

=

0,

j

=

d

+1

D.

Condition 6. The number of dimensions (D) is less

than the number of stores (S), as D + 1 stores

are required to identify the category positions and

intercepts.

5.2. Store Choice Model

The indirect utility for household h selecting store s

on trip t is

UhSst = VhSst +

S hst

(6)

where VhSst denotes the deterministic component and

S hst

denotes

the

error

term.

Consistent

with

our

con-

ceptual modeling framework presented in §4, we

parameterize the deterministic component of the indi-

rect utility of store choice in terms of "store fixed

costs" (e.g., travel distance/time), category needs, and

store-specific category value. Recall that the latter two

terms were used in specifying the deterministic com-

ponent of the indirect utility of purchasing in the cate-

gory shown in Equation (2). However, in-store factors

relating to Price and Display should not be included

because they are only observed by the shopper after

selecting a store. Thus, for the purpose of specify-

ing the store choice model, we define a reduced form

of the deterministic component of the indirect utility

of purchasing in a category previously introduced in

Equation (2) as follows:

VhRsct = hsct + 1hcTimehsct + 2hcQntyhsct-1 + 3hcTimehsct
× Qntyhsct-1 + 4hcFAdvhsct + 5hcWKEndhct (7)
where all terms have been previously defined.12 Whereas VhRsct gives the deterministic component of
the indirect utility of a category, it is the total utility (i.e., value) of the basket that a household intends to purchase at a given store that should influence the household's decision as to which store to visit. To develop such a measure, we first consider the extent to which categories should be weighted differently in determining the impact that a category

12 Notice that the parameter 0hc is also absent. Recall that 0hc represents the estimated baseline purchase frequency for the category, which is included to account for differences in frequency of category purchase when estimating spatial parameters. In the store choice model, adjusting for baseline purchase frequencies is not needed.

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

498

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

has on store choice. As discussed in §4, it is reasonable to expect that certain categories will have more weight in driving store choice; for example, categories such as carbonated beverages, which have high purchase frequency and relatively high dollar value are perhaps more likely to affect store choice decisions than categories such as salt, which have low purchase frequency and low dollar value (ACNielsen 2006). Letting hc denote the weight that household h places on category c, we can write

hc = exp uc + c1$Spendhc + c2APThc + c3$Spendhc × APThc + hc

where $Spend denotes the household's average dollar spend in the category and APT denotes the average time between purchases in the category. In estimating hc, we mean center both covariates and therefore expect that c1 > 0 and c2 < 0, reflecting that, all else the same, the greater the dollar amount spent in a category and the shorter the time between purchases, the greater the category's weight in store choice decisions.
The category importance weight, hc, is used to scale the value of the store's category offering for a given household, and aggregating over all categories that the household needs, we define a measure of the utility that the store offers for the household's entire basket of intended purchases. We denote the utility of the entire basket of intended purchases for household h on trip t as BaskUtil, where

BaskUtilhst =

hc ln 1 + eVhRsct

(8)

cS C

In Equation (8), the term ln 1 + eVhRsct is the inclusive value of a category, i.e., the maximum value of the utility for the category, excluding in-store factors. We can see from this specification that BaskUtil is an importance-weighted measure of utility that captures all categories the household intends to purchase at a given store on a particular trip.
Having defined all of the necessary covariates, we can express the deterministic component of the indirect utility of store s for household h on shopping trip t as

VhSst = hs + 1hLoyalhs + 2hDisths + BaskUtilhst

(9)

where

hs = the intrinsic attraction of the store to the household;
Loyal = category-independent store loyalty measure--for the initialization period, the number of visits made by the household to a given store divided by the total number of stores visited during this same period;

Dist = natural logarithm of the travel time (in minutes) from the centroid of the household's zip + 4 to each store;
BaskUtil = importance-weighted measure of basket utility; and
jh = the parameters associated with the store and household-level covariates.

Household heterogeneity is captured by adopting a

variance components representation for hs and jh as follows:

hs = s + h

(10a)

jh = lj + h

(10b)

In Equation (10a), s denotes the mean attraction of store s, and h gives the variance across households; in Equation (10b), lj denotes the mean impact of covariate j, and h gives the variance across households.
Note that in deciding the specification for the store choice model, we had to make trade-offs as to the number and types of covariates to include to minimize the computational requirements to estimate a rather large set of free parameters with an objective function that requires approximating highdimensional integration. For this reason, and because our primary focus is on the role that destination categories play in influencing where a consumer chooses to shop, we did not include household demographic variables in the store choice model. Rather, we focus on two household-level covariates that have been shown to influence store choice (see Bell et al. 1998). The Loyal covariate is intended to capture categoryindependent store loyalty, which reflects the household's intrinsic preference for a store. That is, the preference for a store that does not vary from trip to trip. This measure is analogous to the brand loyalty measure discussed in the brand choice literature (see, for example, Keane 1997) and is computed, as described above, in the same manner as brand loyalty (see Bucklin and Lattin 1992). The other household-level covariate, Dist, which measures distance traveled, uses information on the location of the household and the store visited to estimate the travel time from each household to each store. Travel times were estimated by geographic services provider ESRI using a proprietary algorithm that incorporates traffic and driving speeds. Finally, as stated above, we do not include household demographics in the model explicitly, but we do investigate the role that demographics play in the importance of a category to a household. To accomplish this, we follow a two-step process. First, for each household, we harvested the category importance parameter ( hc using Bayesian posteriors from the estimated covariance matrix and parameters. Next, we regressed the interhousehold category importance parameters on the household's

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

499

demographic covariates.13 We report these results in §8.2.3.

5.3. Baseline Model Central to the proposed model is the spatial representation in which an ideal-point specification (i.e., Euclidean distance) is used to define the attraction of a category. A tacit assumption in this formulation is that the attraction parameter plays a significant and informative role in defining the deterministic component of the indirect utility of purchasing in the category and ultimately in driving which store a household chooses.
Our baseline model tests this assumption by adopting a linear form for the deterministic component of the indirect utility of purchasing in a category originally defined in Equation (2). Specifically, for the purpose of estimating the baseline model, we define the deterministic component of the indirect utility of purchasing in a category as

VhCsct = 0hc + 1hcTimehsct + 2hcQntyhsct-1 + 3hcTime

× Qntyhsct-1 + 4hcFAdvhsct + 5hcWKEndhct

+ 6hcPricesct + 7hcDisphsct + hsct

(11)

where all terms have been previously defined. There are several important differences to note. First, we have removed hsct, the category attraction parameter, and as such moved away from the proposed spatial model. Second, we include hsct, the longrun merchandising score, directly in the deterministic component, but (contrary to Equation (5)) we redefine
hsct as

hsct = b1hcFavhsct + b2hcNUPCsct + b3hcNBrdsct + b4hcNSizesct + b5hc%PLsct + b6hc%Natlsct + b7hcAdvFsct + b8hcDispFsct + b9hcAvgPricesct

Notice that the coefficients that give the impact of each long-run merchandising covariate do not vary by dimension, although we will still incorporate household and category heterogeneity:14

bjhc = j + c + h

(12)

where j gives the mean impact for covariate j, c gives the variance across categories, and h gives the variance across households. Thus, this baseline

13 We could have harvested all covariates used in the store choice model; however, our primary interest is the extent to which household demographics determine the importance of the category in driving store choice.
14 Recall in our proposed model that category heterogeneity is parameterized in the spatial model specification.

model not only tests the usefulness of the reducedspace spatial representation but also the nonlinear/ distance specification for category attractiveness; in other words, it allows us to test the hypothesis that a simpler model--one that does not recognize that retailers can position their category offerings closer to what consumers want using long-run merchandising policies and that not all categories have the same importance in driving store choice--fits as well as our proposed model.

6. Estimation
Let V S denote the set of parameters specified in VhSst, the deterministic component of the indirect utility of
household h choosing store s on trip t. Similarly, let V C denote the set of parameters specified in VhCsct,
the deterministic component of the indirect utility of
household h choosing to purchase in category c at
store s on trip t. The probability that we observe
household h (h = 1 2 H ) purchasing a subset of
categories c at store s (s = 1 2 S on trip t (t =
1 2 T ) can be written as

Pr yhst = 1  C

= Pr yhst = 1 V S ×

yhct = 1 yhst = 1

cC

× 1 - Pr yhct = 1 yhst = 1 V C

V C yhsct 1-yhsct

(13)

where yhcst = 1 if household h purchases in category c at store s on trip t, 0 otherwise. The first leading
term in Equation (13) gives the probability that house-
hold h will visit store s on trip t. Under the usual
assumption that the error terms hst have Gumbel distributions, the probability that household h will visit
store s on trip t is given by

Pr yhst = 1

VS =

eVhSst

e S

VhSjt

j =1

(14)

The remaining terms in Equation (13) give the prob-

ability that household h purchases in category c on

trip t, conditional on shopping at store s. Assuming

a binary logit model for the distribution of hsct, the probability that household h purchases in category c

on trip t conditional on choosing store s can be writ-

ten as

1

Pr yhct = 1 s = 1 + e-VhCsct

(15)

Letting h = V S V C ], we can write the likelihood for the store choice and category incidence models as

H

TS

L=

Pr yhst = 1  C

h=1 - t=1 s=1

f yhst
h

(16)

where denotes the global set of store choice and

category incidence parameters, denotes the param-

eter covariance matrix, and f

is the distribution

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

500

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

of the parameter vector conditional on the covariance matrix .15 We assume that this distribution is multivariate normal. To account for heterogeneity across household purchase incidence and store choice decisions, we use a continuous distribution with the parameter covariance matrix . To reduce the dimensionality of the covariance matrix , we use a two-factor structure of the Cholesky, including parameters for unique components of the variance (see, e.g., Hansen et al. 2006, Briesch et al. 2009). The parameters in Equation (16) can be estimated using simulated maximum likelihood. Here, we use what is analogous to a mixed nested logit estimation procedure (see Train 2003, Chapter 6 and §7.6) with Halton sequences for the numerical integration implemented with a quasi-Newton algorithm and user-supplied (i.e., analytic) gradients.16

Table 2 Household Descriptive Statistics

Mean

Shopping behaviors Number of households Monthly spending Average spend per trip Number of trips Number of stores visited Trip share at favorite store (%)
Demographics HH income (`000) ($) HH size Children in HH (%) Ethnicity (Caucasian) (%) Elderly (> 64 yrs. old) (%) Education (college or above) (%) Married (%)

368 216 1
34 8 165 7
43 57
53 5 28 34 89 11 38 81

Note. HH, household.

SD
107 76 12 82 64 86 1 13 18
24 3 12
47 32 31 49 39

7. Data
We use a multioutlet panel data set from Charlotte, North Carolina that covers a 104-week period between September 2002 and September 2004. Panelists recorded all packaged and nonpackaged goods purchases using in-home scanning equipment; purchases made in all grocery and nongrocery stores are included so that the data are not limited to a small sample of grocery stores. This is important because packaged goods purchases are frequently made outside of grocery stores. Households are included in the sample if at least 80% of their purchases were made at the five store chains (four supermarkets and one mass merchandise supercenter) for which we have geolocation data and if they spent at least $10 every month.17 The resulting data set includes 368 families with a total of almost 40,000 shopping trips. Descriptive statistics for these households are provided in Table 2, which provides information on household shopping behaviors and demographics. We use the first 26 weeks of data as an initialization period to identify categories purchased by each household as well as to identify the intertemporal variables for categories. We use the middle 52 weeks as an estimation sample and the final 26 weeks as a validation sample.
15 It is true that a store visit implies that the shopper made a purchase in at least one category. However, there are a total of 290 nonperishable categories (of which the 80 largest are modeled), along with perishable categories that are not included in the data set. Thus, it is possible that a shopping trip could be made without buying one of the 80 modeled categories. As a result, we do not have to impose the binding constraint that given a store choice decision, at least one modeled category must be purchased.
16 To test the performance of our model, we performed a series of simulation experiments; details can be obtained by contacting the first author.
17 The last criterion was used to ensure that panelists were faithful in recording their purchases and remained in the panel for the entire 104-week period.

We have detailed price information for 290 categories. From those categories, we selected the top 80 based on total dollars spent in the category; only categories that were not substantial (i.e., in which fewer than 10% of the households purchased) were excluded. The top 80 categories comprise more than 75% of the average market basket (of products tracked by UPC). Table 3 presents category penetration rates and share of total grocery spending for each category, along with the average price for each retail chain. Store statistics are shown in Table 4; this table provides information about store loyalty, travel time from home to the closest store of the retail chain, spending per trip, and averages of the long-run merchandising covariates used in the spatial model, where five of the nine long-run merchandising covariates have been indexed to provide a relative measure. The long-run merchandising covariate statistics tells us something about the (relative) character of each retailer. For example, Walmart offers shoppers more national brands to choose from and, consistent with its EDLP format, offers fewer advertised items but uses more displays. Winn-Dixie, on the other hand, offers shoppers fewer brand choices but overindexes on the percentage of private label brands, whereas Food Lion overindexes on the number of UPCs per brand and BI-LO utilizes more frequent feature advertising than the other retailers. As we might expect, Walmart offers the lowest long-run average prices of any retailer.
It is worth highlighting two potentially interesting characteristics of the shopping behavior of our panelists. First, each household visits, on average, four different stores over the duration of the data and visits their favorite store on 57% of their trips. Thus, the data show substantial intertemporal variability in store choice.

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

501

Table 3 Category Descriptive Statistics

Category

Penetration Share of

Average prices

rate spend

Food Harris Winn-

(%)

(%) BI-LO Lion Teeter Dixie Walmart

Carbonated beverages Cigarettes Cold cereal FZ dinners/entrees Fresh bread and rolls Salty snacks Beer/ale/alcoholic cider Milk Natural cheese Cookies Crackers Luncheon meats Breakfast meats Total chocolate candy Dog food Ice cream/sherbet FZ pizza FZ poultry Cat food Soup Coffee RFG salad/coleslaw Pet supplies Processed cheese Wine Laundry detergent Vegetables Toilet tissue FZ seafood Snack bars/granola bars Total nonchocolate candy FZ novelties Paper towels Household cleaner Dry packaged dinners Internal analgesics Dough/biscuit dough--RFG Frankfurters Vitamins RFG juices/drinks Yogurt Bottled water Soap Toothpaste Pastry/doughnuts Cold/allergy/sinus tablets Salad dressings--SS FZ plain vegetables Canned/bottled fruit Snack nuts/seeds/corn nuts Baking mixes Bottled juices--SS Skin care FZ breakfast food FZ bread/FZ dough Canned meat FZ meat Dish detergent Spices/seasonings Cups and plates FZ appetizers/snack rolls RFG fresh eggs Shampoo Batteries Pickles/relish/olives Margarine/spreads/butter Dinner sausage Deodorant

97 28 23 10 94 57 80 71 99 18 96 47 32 61 98 37 92 12 92 66 95 65 87 77 84 78 90 49 50 82 85 60 57 61 58 97 34 51 96 20 68 21 85 87 50 00 87 50 22 01 86 14 95 65 91 85 48 37 51 36 83 15 51 09 80 98 79 89 72 28 61 14 76 63 67 39 42 66 75 54 55 71 44 29 76 90 76 63 58 70 38 59 78 80 69 29 84 51 57 61 82 88 78 53 35 87 50 27 61 41 56 79 42 39 83 97 80 98 60 33 38 86 96 74 59 78 55 43 72 83 86 14 44 02 61 14

6 03 4 02 3 98 4 80 4 05 3 77 4 46 23 24 22 50 24 32 23 48 24 36 3 08 3 01 2 98 3 22 3 32 2 62 3 01 3 01 2 95 3 53 3 03 2 78 2 96 1 56 1 52 1 67 1 52 1 49 2 75 3 37 3 33 3 65 3 51 3 05 2 60 14 71 14 58 14 59 14 39 14 59 2 39 0 43 0 42 0 44 0 42 0 42 2 12 4 30 4 13 4 74 4 59 3 79 2 00 2 88 2 76 3 21 2 75 2 40 2 08 3 19 3 07 3 55 3 16 2 65 1 98 3 29 3 39 3 80 3 38 3 07 2 02 3 60 3 45 3 89 3 77 3 18 2 21 3 73 3 70 4 18 3 88 3 52 1 44 0 90 0 81 1 01 0 95 0 77 1 33 1 01 1 00 1 14 1 09 0 94 1 28 2 99 2 87 3 32 2 93 2 61 1 23 2 92 2 81 3 58 3 11 2 74 1 14 1 12 1 05 1 30 1 29 1 03 1 89 1 45 1 39 1 49 1 48 1 28 1 40 3 59 3 69 3 95 3 69 3 32 1 04 2 16 2 51 2 69 2 51 2 16 1 44 0 38 0 86 1 40 0 21 0 28 1 23 3 14 2 99 3 18 3 13 2 97 1 05 4 13 4 12 4 45 4 36 3 87 1 09 0 90 0 87 0 94 0 89 0 81 1 23 0 80 0 78 0 89 0 82 0 68 1 04 0 47 0 48 0 51 0 50 0 41 1 03 4 70 4 02 4 67 4 14 3 54 0 86 5 17 5 14 5 49 5 35 4 98 1 07 3 58 3 42 3 75 3 41 2 80 0 62 2 06 1 94 2 23 2 11 1 79 0 91 1 73 1 70 1 85 1 76 1 53 0 92 1 93 1 84 2 04 1 93 1 67 0 89 2 59 2 44 2 76 2 72 2 25 0 91 1 56 1 37 1 65 1 65 0 85 1 03 2 18 2 04 2 40 2 21 1 98 0 74 2 72 2 60 3 07 2 73 2 31 0 87 0 74 0 80 1 03 0 93 0 61 0 89 0 60 0 58 0 67 0 59 0 51 0 61 1 58 1 44 1 65 1 57 1 49 0 55 2 29 2 02 2 55 2 47 1 99 0 81 2 78 2 68 2 81 2 86 2 42 0 84 9 56 9 77 10 15 8 55 8 64 0 71 2 94 2 95 3 12 2 93 2 55 0 66 3 12 2 81 3 59 3 52 2 02 0 67 2 29 2 26 2 49 2 50 2 06 0 87 1 75 1 63 1 88 1 97 1 45 0 76 1 28 1 24 1 38 1 29 1 14 0 60 3 63 3 58 3 95 3 56 2 98 0 71 1 36 1 32 1 49 1 46 1 17 0 68 0 60 0 58 0 63 0 61 0 54 0 59 16 04 15 49 18 16 18 66 15 91 0 61 2 69 2 66 2 79 2 70 2 32 0 68 2 22 2 19 2 31 2 28 1 92 0 58 2 66 2 64 2 78 2 73 2 49 0 53 3 56 2 68 3 24 3 06 2 68 0 59 1 40 1 37 1 55 1 47 1 28 0 65 4 97 4 92 5 92 4 79 4 89 0 56 3 30 3 22 3 99 3 43 2 83 0 62 3 67 3 45 4 20 3 97 3 25 0 52 0 11 0 12 0 12 0 14 0 11 0 52 2 91 2 95 3 14 2 79 2 78 0 70 0 91 0 95 1 00 0 97 0 88 0 56 1 84 1 80 2 13 1 70 1 54 0 55 1 24 1 17 1 41 1 29 1 07 0 55 3 04 3 09 3 62 3 09 2 71 0 49 14 77 14 52 16 64 14 71 13 13

Table 3 (Cont'd.)

Category

Penetration Share of rate spend

Average prices

Food Harris Winn-

(%)

(%) BI-LO Lion Teeter Dixie Walmart

FZ desserts/topping Shortening and oil Baking needs SS dinners Toaster pastries/tarts Air fresheners Toothbrush/dental accesories Food and trash bags Spaghetti/Italian sauce Sanitary napkins/tampons Seafood--SS Peanut butter

60 33 80 43 72 01 61 14 41 30 48 91 47 01 84 51 71 47 42 39 62 23 64 40

0 54 2 73 2 64 2 98 2 78 2 26 0 55 1 29 1 33 1 45 1 37 1 24 0 64 2 65 2 39 2 78 2 69 2 33 0 55 1 39 1 36 1 49 1 38 1 24 0 44 1 94 1 89 2 02 2 11 1 74 0 47 4 21 4 37 4 62 4 46 4 15 0 51 27 72 23 66 20 69 21 49 22 15 0 50 1 18 1 10 1 20 1 29 0 90 0 54 1 04 1 03 1 20 1 10 0 98 0 46 1 29 1 32 1 44 1 35 1 17 0 46 2 16 2 24 2 52 2 23 2 02 0 46 1 73 1 70 1 85 1 83 1 61

Note. FZ, frozen; RFG, refrigerated; SS, shelf stable.

Table 4 Store Descriptive Statistics

Variable

BI-LO Food Lion Harris Teeter Winn-Dixie Walmart

Loyalty (%) Travel time Spent/trip ($) Fav (%) NUPC a (%) NBrd a (%) NSize a (%) %PLa (%) %Natl a (%) AdvF (%) DispF (%) AvgPrice ($)

13 54 0 19
20 33 20 38
28 87 21 79
38 96 0 09
92 24 0 03
98 78 0 04
98 21 0 02
99 23 0 01
88 37 0 01
52 90 0 04
28 65 0 02
0 99 0 003

32 01 0 27
9 33 7 37
26 89 18 87
50 46 0 11
119 47 0 07
101 85 0 11
105 34 0 03
101 96 0 01
96 70 0 05
34 85 0 03
27 71 0 02
0 98 0 003

19 43 0 27
17 51 13 21
33 98 22 56
42 13 0 08
99 76 0 06
99 57 0 08
97 47 0 03
94 41 0 01
101 91 0 02
38 01 0 04
26 51 0 02
1 11 0 003

11 68 0 18
17 45 17 27
24 67 17 64
33 65 0 09
79 67 0 04
82 49 0 05
95 94 0 02
128 27 0 02
71 17 0 02
30 90 0 02
20 20 0 02
1 02 0 002

23 34 0 20
42 01 27 10
22 96 19 86
45 98 0 09
108 86 0 04
117 31 0 12
103 05 0 03
76 14 0 01
141 85 0 03
0 18 0 03
74 56 0 04
0 90 0 002

Note. Standard deviations are in parentheses. aNumbers are indexed to provide a relative measure.

It is also useful to examine single-category shopping trips. Our data set includes 573 trips during which only a single category (one out of the 290 categories18 with UPCs captured in our data set) was purchased. On 36% of these single-category trips, the shopper chose the store he or she visited most often. On 69% of single-category trips, however, the shopper

18 To provide a more extensive examination of single purchase shopping trips we considered all 290 categories in our database as opposed to the 80 categories we selected for modeling purposes.

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

502

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

chose the store with the highest CDI (recall that CDI measures the extent to which retailers get more or less than their fair share of category sales). Thus, without the confounding effects of other categories in the market basket, we find that shoppers were almost twice as likely to choose the store "specializing" in the category as their favorite store, which strongly suggests that specific categories do indeed affect store choice.19
8. Results
We began by fitting several models and progressively increasing the number of dimensions specified for the latent multiattribute space. We stopped increasing the number of latent attribute dimensions when the BIC and CAIC information-theoretic statistics indicated that the improvement in log likelihood from adding an additional dimension did not compensate for the increase in model complexity.
8.1. Model Fit Table 5 provides goodness-of-fit statistics for both insample and out-of-sample results. First, we see that all of the proposed models fit better than the baseline model. Recall that these proposed models include a spatial representation for the attraction parameter. Thus, the superior fit of the proposed models suggests that the relative positions of stores and category ideals in perceptual space may provide insights into the role of categories and category merchandising in store choice decisions and enable retailers to make their stores more attractive by better accommodating shoppers' preferences.
In terms of in-sample fit, the three-dimensional solution has lower BIC and CAIC informationtheoretic statistics than either the two- or fourdimensional solutions. Table 5 also reports in- and out-of-sample log likelihoods along with hit rates. In terms of hit rates, all of the models perform equally well, although the three-dimensional solution provides the highest hit rates in and out of sample. The three-dimensional solution also yields the lowest out-of-sample log likelihood. Given that the threedimensional solution fits the data best, we will focus on this solution in the remainder of our analyses and discussion.20

Table 5 Model Fit Summary

Two-

Three-

Four-

Baseline dimensional dimensional dimensional

Estimation sample

Households

368

368

No. of trips

25,472 25,472

Log likelihood

-552 084 -517 947

No. of parameters

194

387

Choice hit rate (%)

40.9

40.9

Incidence hit rate

87.4% 87.3%

BIC

1,106,927 1,041,394

CAIC

1,107,121 1,041,781

Hold out sample

Households

368

368

No. of trips

12,016 12,016

Log likelihood

-258 465 -242 439

Choice hit rate (%)

43.3

43.4

Incidence hit rate (%) 87.6

87.7

368 25,472 -514 035
503 41.1 89.4% 1,035,220 1,035,723
368 12,016 -240 748 44.6 88.8

368 2,572 -513 513 617 41.0 87.3 1,035,796 1,036,413
368 12,016 -240 765 43.6 87.7

8.2. Parameter Estimates Table 6 presents estimates of the store choice and category incidence parameters. The first set of columns pertains to the mean parameter estimates and the second set of columns to the heterogeneity standard errors.
8.2.1. Store Choice Equation. Focusing first on the store choice model, we see that all of the store intercept mean estimates, which reflect the intrinsic attraction of a store, are statistically significant.21 The Loyal mean parameter estimate is also statistically significant and positive, consistent with previous findings of inertial behavior in store choice (Rhee and Bell 2002). The Dist mean parameter estimate is statistically significant and negative; i.e., all else the same, households prefer to shop at stores that are closer to them.
We see that almost all of the heterogeneity standard deviations in the rightmost panel of Table 6 are statistically significant. The exception is Dist, which indicates that households are homogeneous in their preference to shop at stores closer to them. It appears that households are heterogeneous in their inertial behavior (Loyal) and are slightly more heterogeneous in their intrinsic preference for Walmart compared with the other retailers.22
8.2.2. Category Incidence Equation. Turning to the category incidence model, we see that all of the

19 This analysis, similar to the CDI metric, is not informative about the relative impact of different categories on store choice, however.
20 In response to one anonymous reviewer, we also compared the fit of the three-dimensional model to a simple model that includes only two covariates: Dist and Loyal. Whereas the simple model has only a slightly lower store-choice likelihood, it is less attractive than the proposed model for a number of reasons. One way to think about the proposed model is that it corrects bias in the simple model estimates arising from omitted variables and correlation with the error term--note that we observed large differences not only in the intercepts in the two models but also in

the distance and loyalty parameters. Perhaps more importantly, the simple model has far less diagnostic or informative value to retailers; it does not include any of the category data. We believe that the alternative model described in §5.3 stands as the "theoretically relevant" baseline model because, by not including the category attraction parameter, it addresses the key hypothesis of the proposed model that category positioning does indeed matter.
21 Unless otherwise noted, all parameters are statistically significant at the p < 0 05 level.
22 Dividing a parameter mean value by its heterogeneity value gives a relative measure of response heterogeneity.

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

503

Table 6 Model Structural Parameters

Mean

Value

SE

Store choice -Food Lion -Harris Teeter -Winn Dixie -Walmart Loyal Dist
Category incidence -Intercept
Time Qnty Time × Qnty WKEnd Price Fadv Disp K -category importance $Spnd APT $Spnd × APT

0 469 -0 382 -0 131
1 501 4 050 -0 261
2 370 11 624 -0 649 37 650 0 081 -2 370 -0 081 0 326
4 805 -1 444 -0 384

0 040 0 050 0 059 0 130 0 041 0 020
0 093 0 264 0 028 2 644 0 100 0 091 0 130 0 0144
2 521 0 341 4 254

t -Value
11 67 -7 69 -2 24 11 64 97 65 -13 05
25 51 44 05 -23 41 14 24 14 85 -25 93 -0 63 22 65
1 99 -4 23 -0 09

Household heterogeneity

Value

SE

t -Value

0 130 0 220 0 345 0 225 0 189 0 006
0 131 1 080 0 035 0 846 0 034 0 369 0 065 0 0207

0 027 0 026 0 029 0 042 0 040 0 010
0 003 0 293 0 029 3 126 0 004 0 004 0 141 0 014

4 84 8 52 11 76 5 39 4 46 0 53
40 88 3 68 1 20 0 27 8 00
102 47 0 46 1 46

Category heterogeneity

Value

SE

t -Value

0 049 0 757 0 128 0 585 0 010 0 033 0 133 0 022

0 004 0 269 0 029 3 286 0 004 0 004 0 122 0 015

12 35 2 82 4 37 0 18 2 46 9 08 1 09 1 42

covariates are statistically significant with one exception: whether items in the category were feature advertised (Fadv). The Fadv result is consistent with the findings of Bodapati and Srinivasan (2006) and suggests that, after controlling for other covariates, shoppers are not significantly more likely to purchase in a category because of feature advertising. The Price and Disp parameter mean values have the expected algebraic signs--lower weekly prices and more frequent displays in the category increase the probability of category incidence. The Time parameter's mean estimate is positive, suggesting that the more time since the last category purchase, the more likely the household will purchase in the category on the current trip. The Qnty parameter's mean estimate is negative, suggesting that the greater the quantity of the last category purchase, the less likely the household is to purchase in the category on the current trip. The Time × Qnty interaction's positive mean estimate suggests that shoppers feel significant stock pressure, consistent with the findings of Assunção and Meyer (1993). Finally, perhaps not too surprising, making the shopping trip on the weekend increases the probability that the household will purchase in a category, as weekend trips may reflect stock-up trips that result in larger baskets.
Turning next to the household heterogeneity parameters, we see that four of the eight heterogeneity standard deviations in the first right panel of Table 6 are statistically significant. It appears that households are homogeneous in their response to Qnty, Time × Qnty, Fadv, and Disp but are heterogeneous with respect to category purchase incidence ( -intercept), days since they last purchased in the

category (Time), shopping day preferences (WKEnd), and weekly prices (Price). It is interesting to note that households appear to be somewhat more heterogeneous in their responses to Time, Qnty, and Disp compared with Price. Turning next to category heterogeneity, five of the eight heterogeneity standard deviations are statistically significant. Categories appear to be homogeneous with respect to Time × Qnty, Fadv, and Disp. Finally, there appears to be much more heterogeneity in category price response as compared to the other covariates.
8.2.3. Category Weights. As shown in Table 6, both APT and $Spnd parameter estimates are statistically significant and have the expected algebraic sign, although their interaction is nonsignificant. As expected, it appears that the impact of a category on store choice is greater if there is less time between category purchases (i.e., the category is purchased more frequently) and if the household's spending in the category is greater.
Table 7 summarizes the influence of household demographic characteristics on the importance that shoppers place on a category. For each household demographic variable shown in Table 2, Table 7 shows where we found a significant relationship between interhousehold variation in hc and the households' demographic characteristic. We use a "S+" or "S-" in Table 7 to denote a positive or negative relationship. We see from the table that in 38 of the 80 categories, interhousehold variation in category importance is associated with one or more of the household demographic variables under consideration. Among the statistically significant relationships, we find that

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

504

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

Table 7 Impact of Household (HH) Demographics on the Importance of a Category

Category

Elderly

HH

HH

College

Children

Ethnicity

No. of significant

(65+)

size

income

or above

Married

in HH

(Caucasian)

parameters

1 Carbonated beverages

S-

1

3 Cold cereal

S-

1

6 Salty snacks

S-

S+

2

11 Crackers

S+

1

12 Luncheon meats

S-

1

14 Total chocolate candy

S+

1

15 Dog food

S-

1

17 FZ pizza

S+

1

21 Coffee

S+

S+

2

22 RFG salad/coleslaw

S+

1

23 Pet supplies

S+

1

25 Wine

S-

S-

S-

3

27 Vegetables

S+

1

28 Toilet tissue

S-

1

31 Total nonchocolate candy

S-

1

33 Paper towels

S-

S+

2

34 Household cleaner

S+

S-

2

36 Internal analgesics

S-

1

37 Dough/biscuit dough--RFG

S+

S-

2

38 Frankfurters

S+

S-

S+

3

39 Vitamins

S+

1

41 Yogurt

S-

S+

S+

3

42 Bottled water

S-

1

45 Pastry/doughnuts

S-

1

48 FZ plain vegetables

S-

1

50 Snack nuts/seeds/corn nuts

S+

1

51 Baking mixes

S-

S+

2

52 Bottled juices--SS

S+

1

53 Skin care

S+

S-

2

56 Canned meat

S-

S+

S+

3

63 Shampoo

S+

S+

2

67 Dinner sausage

S-

1

68 Deodorant

S+

S-

2

73 Toaster pastries/tarts

S+

1

74 Air fresheners

S-

S+

2

76 Food and trash bags

S+

1

77 Spaghetti/Italian sauce

S+

1

79 Seafood--SS

S-

S+

2

Notes. FZ, frozen; RFG, refrigerated; SS, shelf stable. "S+" indicates a statistically significant positive relationship; "S-" indicates a statistically significant negative relationship.

elderly households (65 years of age or older) place greater importance on crackers, breakfast meats, coffee, and vitamins, for example, whereas households with children place more importance on yogurt, paper towels, frankfurters, salty snacks, spaghetti, and Italian sauce. In general, although we find significant covariation between interhousehold category importance and household demographics, the relationships were for the most part weak; household demographics accounted for less than 2% of the variation in category importance and, across all comparisons, about 20% of the possible relationships were statistically significant at the p < 0 10 level and less than 10% at the p < 0 05 level.
8.2.4. Store Positions and Long-Run Merchandising Parameters. We find that all of the store position parameters are statistically significant across all three latent attribute dimensions. Interestingly, although there is a demonstrable relationship between physi-

cal geography and the derived perceptual store distance (i.e., we find that approximately 22% of the variation in the perceptual distances between stores is explained by median travel time) nearly four-fifths of the variation in perceptual store distances is not explained by the geographic location of the stores.
The long-run merchandising parameters were estimated for each of the three latent attribute dimensions. We find that 20 of the 27 mean parameter estimates are significant. There is not much intuition in the store positioning or long-run merchandising parameters, however, because of the dimensionality of our model. As a consequence, we have left a detailed discussion of these parameter estimates for the Web appendix.
9. Policy Analysis
Though our reduced-form model does not allow us to recommend categories that could potentially serve

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

505

in the destination role for a retailer, it does allow us to identify categories that actually serve in the destination role. In this section, we investigate the influence of BaskUtil and its components, as well as longrun merchandising policies in influencing store choice decisions.
9.1. Measuring Category Impact on Store Choice Decisions
Recall from Equation (8) that BaskUtil measures a household's utility for the entire basket of intended category purchases on a particular trip if the retailer's store were chosen. BaskUtil incorporates the effects of retailers' long-run merchandising policies and category positions, weighting each category in the basket by its importance to the household's store choice decision. By decomposing BaskUtil into its category components, we can acquire a more nuanced view of the impact of a store's merchandising decisions and identify which stores have been delivering more value in the category. The decomposition is accomplished by averaging the category's contribution to BaskUtil for a given store across households and trips, then scaling by household penetration (percent households) and average purchase frequency (number per year). Scaling by household penetration and purchase frequency adjusts the utility of the category on an "average" trip to reflect the number of trips on which the category is sought.
Table 8 presents the decomposed BaskUtil values. Categories are arranged in descending order of utility. The table also provides the average category utilities as well as the sales rank of each category. We begin by looking across categories to assess differences in category utility. Three interesting results are evident:
1. Category utility is highly skewed--the top four categories have nearly the same collective impact on store choice decisions as the other 76 categories.
2. There appears to be a relationship between average category utility and category sales--the top ten categories in terms of utility include five of the top ten categories in sales ranking.23 That categories with higher sales generally have a greater impact on store choice decisions may not be too surprising;24 however, there are categories with relatively low sales such as yogurt, refrigerated salad/coleslaw, and coffee that have a high impact on store choice decisions.

3. We find no systematic pattern in average category utility rankings in terms of category type (e.g., perishable, dry grocery, nonfood). Across the top quartile of category utilities, we find nearly an even split between perishable/fresh and dry grocery categories with somewhat fewer nonfood categories. If anything, dry grocery categories are slightly more prominent among the top quartile of categories than other types.
We now turn our attention to differences in category utilities across retailers. Overall, we find that Harris Teeter has the highest average category utility (0 378) followed in order by BI-LO (0 333), WinnDixie (0 311), Food Lion (0 285), and Walmart (0 153). These average utilities reflect the percentage of categories in which each retailer offers shoppers higherthan-average utility: Harris Teeter (85% of categories), BI-LO (68% of categories), Winn-Dixie (51% of categories), Food Lion (36% of categories), and Walmart (19% of categories). Relative to the other retailers, Harris Teeter appears to be providing relatively high value for shoppers in more categories than any retailer, whereas Walmart provides relatively high value in the fewest categories. In which categories does Walmart offer high value? All are nonfoods-- deodorant, cold/allergy/sinus, batteries, household cleaners, shampoo, soap, toothbrushes, toothpaste, skin care, vitamins, pet supplies and air fresheners-- with the exception of chocolate and nonchocolate candies.25 Walmart is the only mass merchandiser among the retailers in our data set, so our finding that it offers higher-than-average value in non-food categories provides face validity for the BaskUtil measure. In light of Walmart's strong competitive position, it may seem counterintuitive that it does not offer high value in food categories compared with grocery retailers. Yet Walmart has by far the largest store choice intercept (see Table 6), suggesting that the retailer is generally preferred to its grocery retail competitors.26 In addition, Walmart's low average prices (see Table 4) together with the large negative price parameter (see Table 6) imply that shoppers are drawn to Walmart for its low prices, not necessarily because of its expertise in specific food categories.
Earlier, we argued that CDIs lack diagnostic value in terms of category importance in store choice decisions. Indeed, our primary motivation for developing BaskUtil and its decomposition was to create a

23 Category sales explain 48.1% of the variation in average category utility values.
24 BaskUtil depends on , which is a linear function of household spending in the category, and our decomposed category utility value is adjusted to reflect the number of trips. Both category spending and number of trips play a role in determining category sales.

25 An analysis of retailer merchandising for total chocolate and nonchocolate candy categories shows that Walmart offers far more brands and UPCs per brand and is much more likely to carry shoppers' favorite brands than any other retailer.
26 As a mass merchandiser, Walmart offers many categories that the grocery retailers do not; this is also likely reflected in its store choice intercept.

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

506

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

Table 8
Rank
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62

Decomposition of BaskUtil: Category Utilities

Category

BI-LO

Food Lion

Carbonated beverages Salty snacks Fresh bread and rolls RFG salad/coleslaw Crackers Beer/ale/alcoholic cider Yogurt Cold cereal Coffee FZ breakfast food Toilet tissue Cups and plates Milk Dough/biscuit dough--RFG FZ dinners/entrees Deodorant Pastry/doughnuts Wine Bottled water Laundry detergent Ice cream/sherbet Dish detergent Toaster pastries/tarts Canned meat FZ desserts/topping Internal analgesics Snack nuts/seeds/corn nuts FZ novelties Baking mixes Cold/allergy/sinus tablets Seafood--SS Bottled juices--SS FZ appetizers/snack rolls FZ meat Batteries Soup Cookies Total nonchocolate candy Vegetables Paper towels Pickles/relish/olives Cigarettes Household cleaner Shampoo Natural cheese Dry packaged dinners Margarine/spreads/butter Soap Shortening and oil SS dinners Dog food Luncheon meats FZ pizza Processed cheese FZ seafood Toothbrush/dental accesories RFG fresh eggs Toothpaste Cat food RFG juices/drinks Frankfurters Breakfast meats

7.717 3.245 1.922 0.897 0.984 1.045 0.941 0.905 0.598 0.536 0.538 0.495 0.564 0.541 0.475 0.368 0.312 0.375 0.290 0.261 0.243 0.217 0.262 0.328 0.196 0.190 0.175 0.230 0.190 0.147 0.164 0.157 0.139 0.115 0.051 0.080 0.074 0.046 0.059 0.048 0.041 0.031 0.023 0.019 0.027 0.024 0.021 0.013 0.018 0.020 0.019 0.021 0.020 0.019 0.025 0.014 0.013 0.008 0.013 0.013 0.010 0.009

6.029 2.865 1.578 1.117 0.939 1.246 0.476 0.690 0.612 0.551 0.446 0.283 0.450 0.376 0.443 0.257 0.423 0.444 0.127 0.286 0.260 0.187 0.178 0.251 0.242 0.194 0.131 0.189 0.173 0.103 0.142 0.144 0.118 0.075 0.043 0.069 0.069 0.047 0.051 0.029 0.036 0.053 0.018 0.016 0.019 0.019 0.016 0.015 0.016 0.023 0.015 0.017 0.015 0.014 0.015 0.013 0.012 0.007 0.009 0.010 0.008 0.009

Harris Teeter
6.946 3.443 2.151 1.734 1.525 1.069 1.389 0.920 0.920 0.736 0.533 0.711 0.573 0.450 0.610 0.351 0.617 0.304 0.523 0.337 0.392 0.286 0.262 0.186 0.324 0.282 0.298 0.260 0.190 0.182 0.218 0.163 0.225 0.228 0.060 0.090 0.100 0.060 0.056 0.044 0.059 0.014 0.030 0.018 0.029 0.023 0.022 0.014 0.023 0.016 0.019 0.019 0.026 0.016 0.015 0.011 0.016 0.015 0.013 0.014 0.011 0.010

Winn-Dixie
7.115 2.917 1.758 1.363 0.791 0.784 0.690 0.879 0.710 0.504 0.651 0.508 0.504 0.539 0.368 0.210 0.352 0.310 0.181 0.217 0.260 0.305 0.350 0.285 0.295 0.213 0.154 0.170 0.213 0.126 0.140 0.137 0.102 0.082 0.031 0.074 0.051 0.040 0.065 0.049 0.045 0.025 0.021 0.016 0.027 0.018 0.025 0.013 0.021 0.015 0.017 0.021 0.011 0.016 0.012 0.006 0.015 0.005 0.009 0.010 0.011 0.010

Walmart
2.854 1.481 0.747 0.406 0.537 0.210 0.408 0.379 0.340 0.160 0.282 0.297 0.202 0.168 0.174 0.708 0.189 0.088 0.272 0.224 0.064 0.212 0.114 0.112 0.058 0.177 0.160 0.037 0.053 0.247 0.055 0.062 0.051 0.038 0.164 0.025 0.040 0.066 0.015 0.025 0.011 0.008 0.033 0.047 0.008 0.009 0.007 0.032 0.006 0.007 0.013 0.005 0.007 0.006 0.004 0.025 0.004 0.016 0.007 0.003 0.003 0.003

Average
6.132 2.790 1.631 1.104 0.955 0.871 0.781 0.754 0.636 0.498 0.490 0.459 0.459 0.415 0.414 0.379 0.378 0.304 0.279 0.265 0.244 0.241 0.233 0.233 0.223 0.211 0.183 0.177 0.164 0.161 0.144 0.132 0.127 0.108 0.070 0.068 0.067 0.052 0.049 0.039 0.039 0.026 0.025 0.023 0.022 0.019 0.018 0.017 0.017 0.017 0.016 0.016 0.016 0.014 0.014 0.014 0.012 0.010 0.010 0.010 0.009 0.008

Sales rank
1 6 5 22 11 7 41 3 21 54 28 60 8 37 4 68 45 25 42 26 16 58 73 56 69 36 50 32 51 46 79 52 61 57 64 20 10 31 27 33 65 2 34 63 9 35 66 43 70 72 15 12 17 24 29 75 62 44 19 40 38 13

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

Table 8 (Cont'd.)

Rank

Category

BiLo

63

Spaghetti/Italian sauce

0.007

64

Skin care

0.002

65

Peanut butter

0.009

66

Canned/bottled fruit

0.008

67

Spices/seasonings

0.005

68

Total chocolate candy

0.005

69

Baking needs

0.005

70

FZ bread/FZ dough

0.004

71

Snack bars/granola bars

0.004

72

Dinner sausage

0.003

73

Food and trash bags

0.002

74

Vitamins

0.001

75

FZ poultry

0.001

76

FZ plain vegetables

0.001

77

Pet supplies

0.000

78

Sanitary napkins/tampons

0.001

79

Salad dressings--SS

0.001

80

Air fresheners

0.000

Note. FZ, frozen; RFG, refrigerated; SS, shelf stable.

FoodLion
0.009 0.003 0.007 0.005 0.006 0.004 0.004 0.003 0.003 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.000 0.000

Harris Teeter
0.013 0.004 0.008 0.009 0.008 0.007 0.007 0.005 0.003 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.002 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.001

Winn-Dixie
0.008 0.003 0.007 0.007 0.004 0.003 0.005 0.004 0.003 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.000 0.000 0.001 0.000

Walmart
0.003 0.023 0.004 0.002 0.003 0.007 0.003 0.001 0.003 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.001 0.000 0.001 0.001 0.000 0.001

Average
0.008 0.007 0.007 0.006 0.005 0.005 0.005 0.004 0.003 0.002 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.000 0.000

507
Sales rank
77 53 80 49 59 14 71 55 30 67 76 39 18 48 23 78 47 74

metric that shows which categories are most important to shoppers when choosing a store while also capturing the relative value that different stores provide in each category. Analyzing category utilities across retailers within a category enables us to determine the relative value provided by a retailer in a specific category. If a retailer provides more value in a specific category than competing retailers, we would expect shoppers to be more likely to choose that retailer when they intend to purchase in the category and, as a result, be more likely to actually purchase in the category at that retailer. Accordingly, we calculated within-category correlations (i.e., across stores) between the category utility values shown in Table 8 and their corresponding CDI values, which appear in Table 1. Across the 80 categories in our data set, we generally find strong positive correlations: the mean correlation is 0.684, 81.3% of the correlations are greater than 0.5, and 65.0% of the correlations are greater than 0.75.27 Interestingly, computing correlations within-store (i.e., across category) for the five retailers reveals small and nonsignificant relationships (the mean correlation is 0.105). Thus, although the category utilities obtained from decomposing BaskUtil are correlated with a store's relative category development, they are more informative about which categories have greater impact on store choice for a given retailer. This is important in understanding how relative category value, based in part on long-run merchandising policies, attracts shoppers to a retailer's stores.
27 A nonparametric sign test for correlations greater than 0.75 yields less than a 0.01 probability that this would occur by chance.

9.2. Capturing the Impact of Long-Run Merchandising on Store Choice
The category utilities shown in Table 8 depend on the store-specific category attraction parameter (see Equation (4)) and the underlying multidimensional spatial model. In the perceptual model, the distance between a store's position and the shopper's category ideal is adjusted based on the effectiveness of the retailer's long-run category merchandising policies (see Equation (5)). However, because our bestfitting model includes three latent dimensions, and because store positions, category ideal points, and the algebraic signs of merchandising parameters all differ across dimensions, specific merchandising recommendations would be idiosyncratic and difficult to explain. On the other hand, the long-run category merchandising variables (e.g., favorite brands carried, number of brands, number of UPCs per brand, number of sizes per brand) are all mean-centered. By replacing the estimated parameters for these variables with zeros, we can thus determine what the category utility would have been if the retailer's long-run merchandising policies had been "average." By comparing these hypothetical values with the estimated category utilities in Table 8, we can parsimoniously evaluate the impact of retailers' long-run merchandising policies on store choice decisions.
Table 9 investigates the extent to which actual longrun merchandising policies adopted by each retailer resulted in higher category utilities than average policies would have produced for the top quartile of categories shown in Table 8. In the table, the value 1 indicates that the retailer's category utility is higher than that which would have been obtained under average merchandising, and the value 0 indicates that the retailer's category utility is lower than

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

508

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

Table 9 Effective Merchandising Findings

Utility rank

Category

1

Carbonated beverages

2

Salty snacks

3

Fresh bread and rolls

4

RFG salad/coleslaw

5

Crackers

6

Beer/ale/alcoholic cider

7

Yogurt

8

Cold cereal

9

Coffee

10

FZ breakfast food

11

Toilet tissue

12

Cups and plates

13

Milk

14

Dough/biscuit dough--RFG

15

FZ dinners/entrees

16

Deodorant

17

Pastry/doughnuts

18

Wine

19

Bottled water

20

Laundry detergent

Effectively merchandising (%)

Note. FZ, frozen; RFG, refrigerated.

BI-LO
0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 40

Food Lion
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 5

Harris Teeter
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 20

WinnDixie
1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0

Walmart
0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 10

% effectively merchandising
20 20 40 40 20 40
0 0 20 40 20 40 20 60 0 0 20 60 0 0 23

what average merchandising policies would have produced. Interestingly, in 14 of the top 20 categories, at least one retailer merchandizes the category relatively effectively, while in 7 of the top 20 categories, a single retailer is merchandising effectively.28 BI-LO and Winn-Dixie both merchandise 3 of the top 5 and 8 of the 20 most high-impact categories effectively. However, Winn-Dixie is the only retailer that is merchandising effectively in carbonated beverages, salty snacks, and milk--three categories that rank in the top 10 in terms of sales. In contrast, Food Lion merchandises only 1 of the top 20 categories (pastry and doughnuts) effectively, whereas Walmart merchandises only 2 of the top 20 categories (beer/ale/alcoholic cider and wine) effectively.
10. Concluding Remarks
Our study has focused on how individual categories impact store choice decisions and on developing a method for identifying destination categories. We model only consumer shopping behavior in response to retailers' marketing mix decisions, not retailers' response to consumer demand. This reduced-form modeling approach precludes us from recommending specific actions that retailers could implement to develop new destination categories.29 Our data set includes the 80 largest of 290 total categories that are tracked by universal product code. Unfortunately,
28 This is not to say that retailers may have other goals (e.g., profitability) that are not considered in our analysis.
29 Our discussion of these issues has benefited from the comments of the associate editor and two anonymous reviewers.

perishable categories are not included in our data set, so their impact on store choice is not incorporated in our model. This is a common shortcoming of panel data from syndicated data providers but is nevertheless a limitation of our analysis. Our analysis is also limited by geographic information. Store choices are recorded at the trip level, but we do not know where each trip originated and terminated. We therefore have assumed that each trip begins and ends at the panelist's home. Again, this is a common characteristic of panel data, but it does introduce measurement error into our model and underestimates the effect of geographic convenience on store choice. A final limitation of our study is that causal data for category purchases are pooled across stores. We assume that, if any store in a retail chain displays a particular SKU, then all stores in that chain display the SKU. In other words, we assume uniform implementation of display within a retail chain. This assumption also results in measurement error, underestimating the effect of display on category purchases.
Our research could be extended in the future in different ways. First, to recommend specific actions that retailers could implement to develop destination categories, a structural model that comprehensively captures the relationship between consumer shopping behavior and retailers' strategic marketing mix decisions (including merchandising) incorporating equilibrium behavior should be developed. Second, future researchers can develop more direct analytic methods to address the inherent endogeneity of category purchase and store choice. Third, our use of perceptional

Briesch, Dillon, and Fox: Category Positioning and Store Choice: The Role of Destination Categories

Marketing Science 32(3), pp. 488­509, © 2013 INFORMS

509

distance mapping could be used to evaluate merchandising effectiveness at the category level and to suggest approaches to improving merchandising effectiveness category by category. Fourth, the efficacy of our model for selecting destination categories could be tested experimentally, either by matching stores of a given retailer within a geographic market or by comparing stores across geographic markets for the same retailer. Finally, the framework we have developed could be extended to address the question of how much shoppers buy; i.e., purchase quantity.30
Acknowledgments The authors thank Information Resources, Inc. for providing the data used in this paper. Any mistakes or omissions are the sole responsibility of the authors.
Supplemental Material Supplemental material to this paper is available at http://dx .doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2013.0775.
References
ACNielsen (2006) Consumer-Centric Category Management (John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ).
Ainslie A, Rossi PE (1998), Similarities in choice behavior across product categories. Marketing Sci. 17(2):91­106.
Arnold SJ, Tigert DJ (1982) Comparative analysis of determinants of patronage. Lusch RF, Darden WR, eds. Retail Patronage Theory: 1981 Workshop Proc. (Center for Management and Economic Research, University of Oklahoma, Tulsa), 118­124.
Arnold SJ, Ma S, Tigert DJ (1978) A comparative analysis of determinant attributes in retail store selection. Hunt HK, ed. Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 5 (Association for Consumer Research, Ann Arbor, MI), 663­667.
Arnold SJ, Roth V, Tigert DJ (1981) Conditional logit versus MDA in the prediction of store choice. Monroe KB, ed. Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 9 (Association for Consumer Research, Washington, DC), 665­670.
Arnold SJ, Oum TH, Tigert DJ (1983) Determinant attributes in retail patronage: Seasonal, temporal, regional and international comparisons. J. Marketing Res. 20(2):149­157.
Assunção JL, Meyer RJ (1993) The rational effect of price promotions on sales and consumption. Management Sci. 39(5):517­535.
Baumol WJ, Ide EA (1956) Variety in retailing. Management Sci. 3(1):93­101.
Bell DR, Lattin JM (1998) Shopping behavior and consumer preference for store price format: Why "large basket" shoppers prefer EDLP. Marketing Sci. 17(1):66­88.
Bell DR, Ho TH, Tang CS (1998) Determining where to shop: Fixed and variable costs of shopping. J. Marketing Res. 35(3):352­369.
Blattberg RC, Fox EJ, Purk ME (1995) Category Management: A Series of Implementation Guides, Vols. I­IV (Food Marketing Institute, Washington, DC).
Bodapati A, Srinivasan V (2006) The impact of feature advertising on customer store choice. Working paper, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.
Boatwright P, Nunes JC (2001) Reducing assortment: An attributebased approach. J. Marketing 65(3):50­63.

Briesch RA, Chintagunta P, Fox E (2009) How does assortment affect grocery store choice? J. Marketing Res. 46(2):177­189.
Broniarczyk SM, Hoyer WD, McAlister L (2006) Retail assortment: More = better. Krafft M, Mantrala MK, eds. Retailing in the 21st Century: Current and Future Trends (Springer, Berlin), 225­238.
Bucklin RE, Lattin JM (1992) A model of product category competition among grocery retailers. J. Retailing 68(3):271­293.
Chernev A, Hamilton R (2009) Assortment size and option attractiveness in consumer choice among retailers. J. Marketing Res. 46(3):410­420.
Chernev A, Mick DG, Johnson MD (2003) When more is less and less is more: The role of ideal point availability and assortment in consumer choice. J. Consumer Res. 30(2):170­183.
Chib S, Seetharaman PB, Strijnev A (2004) Model of brand choice with a NO-purchase option calibrated to scanner panel data. J. Marketing Res. 41(2):184­196.
Dhar S, Hoch SJ, Kumar N (2001) Affective category management depends on the role of the category. J. Retailing 77(2):165­184.
Erdem T, Imai S, Keane MP (2003) Brand and quantity choice dynamics under price uncertainty. Quant. Marketing Econom. 1(1):5­64.
Erdem T, Keane M, Sun B (2006) The impact of advertising on consumer price sensitivity in experienced goods markets. Working paper, New York University, New York.
Food Marketing Institute (1993) Efficient Consumer Response: Enhancing Consumer Value in the Grocery Industry (Food Marketing Institute, Washington, DC).
Fox EJ, Hoch SJ (2005) Cherry-picking. J. Marketing 69(1):46­62.
Hansen K, Singh V, Chintagunta P (2006) Understanding storebrand purchase behavior across categories. Marketing Sci. 25(1):75­90.
Hendel I, Nevo A (2009) A simple model of demand accumulation. Working paper, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
Hoch SJ, Bradlow ET, Wansink B (1999) The variety of an assortment. Marketing Sci. 18(4):527­546.
Huff D (1964) Redefining and estimating a trading area. J. Marketing 28(1):34­38.
Kahn B, Schmittlein D (1989) Shopping trip behavior: An empirical investigation. Marketing Lett. 1(1):55­69.
Keane MP (1997) Modeling heterogeneity and state dependence in consumer choice behavior. J. Bus. Econom. Statist. 15(3):310­327.
Kim B-D, Park K (1997) Studying patterns of consumer's grocery shopping trip. J. Retailing 73(4):501­517.
Kollat DT, Willett RP (1967) Consumer impulse purchasing behavior. J. Marketing Res. 4(1):21­31.
Manchanda P, Ansari A, Gupta S (1999) The "shopping basket": A model for multicategory purchase incidence decisions. Marketing Sci. 18(2):95­114.
McAlister L, George EI, Chien Y-H (2009) A basket-mix model to identify cherry-picked brands. J. Retailing 85(4):425­436.
Morales A, Kahn BE, McAlister L, Broniarczyk SM (2005) Perceptions of assortment variety: The effects of congruency between consumers' internal and retailers' external organization. J. Retailing 81(2):159­169.
Reilly WJ (1931) The Law of Retail Gravitation (Pillsbury, New York).
Rhee H, Bell D (2002) The inter-store mobility of supermarket shoppers. J. Retailing 78(4):225­237.
Train KE (2003) Discrete Choice Methods with Simulations (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK).
Zhang Q, Gangwar M, Seetharaman PB (2010) Store loyalty as a category-specific trait: What drives it? Working paper, University of Iowa, Iowa City.

30 This extension was suggested by an anonymous reviewer.

