Vol. 32, No. 2, March­April 2013, pp. 325­341 ISSN 0732-2399 (print) ISSN 1526-548X (online)

http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mksc.1120.0765 © 2013 INFORMS

Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

Julio J. Rotemberg
Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts 02163, jrotemberg@hbs.edu
Asetting is considered where consumers keep track of the extent to which brands care about them, which is modeled as altruism of brands toward their target consumers. Consumers who purchase an experience good of high quality reasonably deduce that the supplier of this good is relatively altruistic toward them, and they are therefore more keen to purchase a brand extension that is also directed at them. As a result, the success of brand extensions depends on the overlap between the customers of the original product and the target customers of the extension product. The quality and demand for a brand extension can be higher if the brand is perceived as caring only for its most quality-conscious consumers rather than for all possible buyers of the good.
Key words: quality provision; firm objectives; brand extensions; price signaling History: Received: May 25, 2011; accepted: November 8, 2012; Preyas Desai served as the editor-in-chief and
Ganesh Iyer served as associate editor for this article. Published online in Articles in Advance January 23, 2013.

1. Introduction
In many of the mission statements collected by Abrahams (2004), firms and brands claim to care for their customers. At the same time, the evidence of Fournier (1998) suggests that some customers keep track of how much brands care for them, with one customer remembering that she reacted to a design change feeling, "How could they do that to me?" (Fournier 1998, p. 355). The willingness of consumers to attribute human emotions to brands might seem absurd but for the fact that decisions about brands are made by people, and that both founders and boards of directors can delegate decisions to individuals who put weight on their own emotions. Moreover, if the pride and self-esteem of managers, designers, and engineers depend on their assessment of their and their firm's contributions to the lives of consumers, firms that sometimes act as if they sacrifice profits to let their decision makers enhance consumer welfare might be able to recruit more motivated and effective personnel (Tyler 1999). Even if decisions within firms inevitably favor the present value of profits, the tendency of consumers to anthropomorphize brands, as demonstrated by Fournier (1998), can lead firms with a reputation for "caring" to be held in higher esteem. Consumers might then use firms' actions as gauges of their caring, and firms might find themselves with an incentive to act as if they did.
This paper addresses two issues that arise in this context. First, what exactly is a "caring" firm expected to do in regard to product quality, such that not doing it demonstrates a lack of caring? Second, what are the benefits of acting in such a caring manner?

This paper analyzes these questions by developing the simplest possible model of caring--namely, one where firms internalize consumer utility to a small extent. This can be thought of as a simplification of a more complex process in which decision makers within firms put more weight on consumer emotions than seems warranted by their apparent impact on the present value of profits, with the ultimate result that long-run profits can be higher. In Isaacson (2011), Steve Jobs makes the related claim that Apple's success under his leadership was due to it being more motivated by making great products than by the resulting profits, whereas it was less successful under John Sculley, who "flipped these priorities to where the goal was to make money" (p. 567).
In my simplification, a caring firm (or brand) acts as if its objective function were equal to the sum of its profits and, with a weight 0 < a < 1, the utility of its customers. This weighted utility has been called "altruistic," and I use the term here as well. This altruism can lead firms to make donations to causes that their customers value highly, because that would increase their utility, but such donations are not guaranteed because a < 1. What this altruism ensures is that firms somewhat moderate those actions that raise profits while hurting consumers. For example, Rotemberg (2011) shows that it can prevent firms from "price gouging" consumers in emergencies. In the experience goods context considered here, this altruism leads firms to provide higher-quality goods than those provided by selfish firms whose a equals 0.

325

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

326

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

An important aspect of altruism comes into play here--namely, that altruism is typically directed, so that people are more altruistic toward certain individuals and less altruistic toward others. Krebs (1975), for example, presents evidence that individuals are more likely to feel empathy and be generous toward people who are similar to themselves. This extra empathy may help explain the high quality and corresponding success of companies such as UnderArmour that are founded by individuals who used to belong to the group the firm intends to target.
Thus, an individual who has purchased a highquality good might be justified in inferring that the brand has a special affinity for people like him. Such an individual should then expect high quality from a brand extension aimed at him, whether or not the high quality of the original product was in fact due to firm altruism. By contrast, individuals who have not been interested in the existing products of a brand have much less reason to expect altruism of the brand toward themselves, even if the brand's existing customers are extremely satisfied. Their expectation of the quality of an extension aimed at them is correspondingly lower.
Initial sales of a brand extension thus rationally depend on the extent to which the customers of the brand's original product are also being targeted by the extension. For sales to rise, the two products have to "fit" in the sense of being targeted at similar consumer segments. Some of the empirical evidence on brand extensions conforms to this pattern, although this does not rule out alternative interpretations. As an example, Smith & Wesson failed in the mass market for bicycles, which it entered in 2002, even though it had been successful in the market for bicycles aimed at law enforcement, which it entered in 1997.1 More generally, Keller (1998) shows that several successful extensions can be used together with the brand's original product, so they would naturally seem to target the same customers. A good example of this is provided by the successful extension of Aunt Jemima, a brand focused initially on dry pancake mixes, into pancake syrup. Another is the extension of the toothpaste brand Colgate into toothbrushes.
Broniarczyk and Alba (1994) propose a different theory for the dependence of an extension's success on the fit between a brand's original product and its extension. According to this theory, an extension's success depends on whether the unique brand associations of the original product are "relevant in the extension category" (Broniarczyk and Alba 1994, p. 227). The most prescient finding of their study concerns Crest. Their survey respondents associated

Close-Up with breath freshening, which they deemed more relevant for breath mints, whereas they associated Crest with dental protection, which they deemed more relevant for toothbrushes. Consistent with this, their respondents preferred a Crest extension into toothbrushes (before Crest introduced this extension) and preferred a Close-Up extension into breath mints. This particular finding seems consistent with the model presented here as well. The reason is that Close-Up was directed at people such as smokers who were particularly concerned with the smell of their breath (and could be the target market for breath mints), whereas the target market for Crest seemed more concerned with health and hygiene.
The model that captures these intuitions formally is one where a firm makes a costly "vertical" quality choice concerning a product and where consumers are initially uncertain about this choice. Consumers use three pieces of information to help them estimate this quality. The first is the price of the good, so that price can be a signal of quality as in Bagwell and Riordan (1991) and Judd and Riordan (1994).2 The second is the customer segment to which the good is addressed. Finally, they know the segment, if any exists, to which the brand has provided a high-quality good in the past. If all firms were selfish, the overlap between these two segments would be of no consequence. With directed altruism, on the other hand, this overlap does more than just increase the demand for the extension by customers of the original product. It also increases the range of parameters for which an equilibrium exists in which altruistic firms provide a new good of high quality. Such equilibria are often disrupted by selfish firms who deliver low-quality goods while mimicking the prices of altruistic firms. If an existing product leads to the belief that the brand is altruistic, a brand that is truly altruistic finds it easier to provide high-quality goods.
There is also a more subtle implication of the fact that consumers evaluate the target of a brand's altruism when deciding whether its extension is likely to be good for them. This is that a new product from a brand that is expected to feel altruism only toward its most quality-conscious consumers may have higher quality, and attract more demand, than a similar product from a brand that cares for both these consumers and consumers that are somewhat less quality conscious. The reason is that the latter also welcome lower prices so that a brand that cares for them should be relatively more keen on innovations that have a large potential for cost reductions. The result is that a brand that cares for all its purchasers finds it more difficult to convince its customers that its brand

1 See Haig (2011, p. 85), Associated Press (1997), and Business Wire (2003).

2 Contrary to these papers, it turns out that, here, a low price can be a credible signal of high quality.

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

327

extension is of extremely high quality. A brand that cares only about its quality-conscious segment, by contrast, is not expected to care as much about potential cost reductions, so its commitment to quality is less in question.
Notice that the sources of high quality and additional demand for certain brand extensions that I have just discussed do not require that the demand for a brand's existing products fall when customers are dissatisfied with the extension. Having said this, it is worth noting that people can experience anger, and thus a desire to hurt, when a brand's observed behavior is incompatible with the altruism that people expect. Even though Isaacson (2011) quotes Steve Jobs as caring for his users, the book suggests that his empathy for Apple's customers may not have been as important as his desire to be proud of its products. Nonetheless, the delight consumers experienced with his creations may have led them to infer that he did, in fact, care for them. This could help explain why they reacted with so much anger when Apple dramatically lowered the price of the iPhone in 2007. I thus follow Rotemberg (2011) and also consider the case where some of the consumers who expect altruism from a particular brand react with anger when this firm's brand extension is of low quality. This anger then leads them to reduce their demand for the brand's original product. As a result, brands that are expected to be altruistic are afraid of losing existing sales if they provide low-quality extensions, and this can lead even selfish firms to provide high quality goods. Because this effect raises the demand for brand extensions, it turns out to have a positive effect on the quality provided by altruists as well.
A similar fear of losing existing sales plays a central role in the umbrella branding literature that includes Wernerfelt (1988), Cabral (2000), and MiklósThal (2012). In that literature, these losses in sales occur if and only if consumers lower their estimate of the quality of existing goods when they purchase an extension with which they are dissatisfied. As demonstrated in Choi (1998), if one modifies the Wernerfelt (1988) and Cabral (2000) models so that quality judgments of the original product are unaffected by failed extensions, the demand for new products does not depend on whether they are brand extensions or not. By contrast, the anger that is unleashed when consumers are disappointed by a firm's altruism should lead to sales reductions even if perceptions of quality are unchanged. As it happens, there is some empirical support for the idea that the perceived quality of existing products is independent of the properties of brand extensions. In Roedder-John et al. (1998), respondents did not significantly alter their judgment of the gentleness of Johnson & Johnson's Baby

Shampoo upon learning that the company had introduced other bath products that were deemed to be low in gentleness. Summarizing their study, RoedderJohn et al. (1998, p. 25) say, "Overall, these findings provide support for our view that beliefs about flagship products are highly resistant to change."
Perceptions of quality are likely to have been particularly stable in the product examined by Swaminathan et al. (2001, pp. 11­13), as this was a food product that had a 53% market share in its category before its manufacturer introduced an unrelated extension. In spite of this, Swaminathan et al. (2001, pp. 12­13) show that individuals who purchased the extension, which ultimately failed, were significantly less likely to repeat their purchases of the original product.
Firms in Wernerfelt (1988), Choi (1998), and Cabral (2000) seek to maintain a reputation for "high quality" rather than one for altruism. The notion of high quality can be applied narrowly, covering, for example, the consistency of a particular product, or broadly, covering everything the firm does. Neither approach seems helpful in explaining why fit matters for the success of brand extensions. On the other hand, altruism toward customers would presumably lead to consistent products, because inconsistent ones can be very disappointing. Thus, the reputation considered here may subsume other valuable reputations.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the structure of the model and analyzes the market for an existing good, which can act as a hostage when a new good is introduced by an existing brand. Section 3 studies the introduction of a new good by a new firm. It demonstrates that a more altruistic firm is more prone to offer a highquality good, particularly if consumers believe it is altruistic. Section 4 turns its attention to the new product introductions of a brand that has already sold a successful product to the consumers targeted by the extension and supposes that some consumers react with anger when their expectations of altruism are disappointed. Consumers' perception that a brand is altruistic is shown to increase both the demand for the extension and the likelihood that this extension is of high quality. Section 5 demonstrates that the demand for a new good can be lower if it is sold by a brand that is expected to be altruistic toward all its consumers rather than by one whose altruism is targeted only toward its most quality-conscious segment. Section 6 presents some concluding remarks.
2. The Setup
The temporal structure of the model is close to Choi (1998) and Cabral (2000). There are three periods: 0, 1, and 2. In Periods 0 and 2, an incumbent brand is

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

328

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

the monopoly provider of an "old" good with known quality. In Period 1, either the incumbent or another brand can start producing a new good. Before they produce, entrants determine the quality of this good. For the moment, both the high- and the low-quality versions have the same marginal cost c¯, which is also the marginal cost of the old good.3 In addition, a positive setup cost is required to produce high-quality goods. Consumers do not learn the new good's quality until Period 2, when it is available for sale once again. This timing is illustrated in Table 1.4
As in Rotemberg (2008, 2011), consumer j's utility Uj depends on his material payoffs xj , on the material payoffs of the brand he purchases from, on his altruism aj toward the brand, and on his assessment of the extent to which the brand acts altruistically toward him. In particular,

Uj = xj + aj - a¯j a^

aj a¯j a^  0

(1)

where aj denotes his direct altruism toward the brand, and the function takes a value of 0 if given the information set a^, consumers cannot reject the hypothesis that the brand acts as if it had an altruism parameter greater than or equal to a¯j . Otherwise, equals ¯ > 0. For simplicity, aj is set equal to 0.5 A fraction of consumers is "altruism-sensitive" and has a¯j = a¯ > 0. For the rest, a¯j = 0. The standard case in which consumers are never angry obtains when is 0, and considerable attention is devoted to this case below.
The population consists of H consumers, not all of whom value particular goods or qualities. There are ho potential consumers for the old good. For these ho consumers, the incremental material payoff from consuming one unit of the good rather than none equals , where this is drawn from a distribution with cumulative distribution function (cdf) F . The variable can be interpreted as measuring the extent to which individuals value the "quality" embedded in the good. This interpretation turns out to be useful when the focus shifts to the hn individuals that are potential customers for the new good introduced in Period 1, as shown below. As is true also of this new good, consumers do not obtain any incremental benefit from purchasing a second unit of the old good in any given period.

3 Because some equilibria involve a price that is slightly below marginal cost, it is important that c¯ be positive. On the other hand, the assumption that the old and new goods have the same marginal cost is made only for simplicity.
4 It may seem odd not to let the old good be available in Period 1 as well. This is done only for simplicity. Because no information about the new good is available at this point, the market for the old good would be identical in Period 1 to the Period 2 market without new goods.
5 It could be positive if, for instance, the firm donated a fraction of its profits to a charity that the consumer wished to support.

Table 1 Model Sequence

Period

Firm action

Consumer information

Consumer action

Period 0 Between
0 and 1 Period 1
Period 2

Set price for o Set quality for n Pay development costs Set price for n
Set price for o and n

Quality of o
Quality of o Target customers for
o and n Quality of o and n

Purchase o
Purchase n
Purchase o and n

Let

i t

and

Bti

denote,

respectively,

the

profits

and

consumer surplus from the sale of the good of type i

in period t, and a < 1 is a parameter giving a firm's

altruism toward its consumers. The distribution of a

across new firms is given by the cdf Ga. For simplicity, discounting is ignored in this section. A firm that

produces only the old good then has a level of welfare

given by

W o = W0o + W2o

where Wto =

o t

+

aBto

and t = 0

2

whereas a new entrant that produces only the new good has a welfare level equal to

W n = W1n + W2n

where Wtn =

n t

+

aBtn

and t = 1

2

In both these formulas, a firm values a unit of consumer surplus a times as much as it values a unit of profits. An incumbent firm that produces both the old good and the new good has a welfare level W , which equals W o + W n.
Consider now the market for the old good in Period 2. Because the quality of this good is known, its supplier only needs to determine its price. Because the new and old goods are treated symmetrically in many respects, this analysis sets the stage for the study of equilibrium quality that follows.
Suppose for the moment that all consumers base their purchases exclusively on their material payoffs. If the seller charges p2o, all consumers with  p2o buy the good, and sales equal ho 1 - F p2o . To simplify the analysis, let be uniform between 0 and Y , so F = /Y and sales equal ho 1 - p2o/Y . Total consumer surplus is then

Y
ho p2o

- p2o d Y

ho Y - p2o 2 = 2Y

(2)

A firm that acts as if its altruism parameter were a would then set the price p2o to maximize

W2o a p2o = ho

1

-

p2o Y

p2o - c¯

a +

Y - p2o 2Y

2

(3)

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

329

The first-order condition for this problem is

2p2o - Y + a Y - p2o = c¯

(4)

so that its optimal price equals

p

a

c¯ + 1 - a Y = 2-a

(5)

The derivative of this price with respect to a equals c¯ - Y / 2 - a 2, which is negative because the maximum willingness to pay Y must exceed marginal cost.
A high price can thus lead altruism-sensitive consumers to reject the hypothesis that a firm's altruism equals at least a¯. Rotemberg (2011) studies the resulting Nash equilibrium and shows that, regardless of the distribution of types Ga, there is a unique equilibrium where firms whose actual altruism equals a¯ charge p a¯ . His demonstration relies on the assumption that a fraction greater than or equal to of firms whose altruism truly equals a¯ are naive in the sense that they neglect the effect of their price on consumers' inference regarding their altruism. The fraction is the size of the test that altruism-sensitive consumers use to test the hypothesis that firms' altruism equals at least a¯. Neglecting these details, it is reasonable to imagine that the price p a¯ should not lead any consumer to reject the hypothesis that their supplier has an altruism parameter equal to a¯, so that firms with this altruism level find it optimal to charge this price. Whether selfish firms also charge this price has no bearing on the result of this testing procedure and thus no effect on altruistic firms.
Firms that do charge a higher price cause the hypothesis that their altruism is at least a¯ to be rejected, and altruism-sensitive consumers respond by setting
= ¯. If ¯ is large enough, and price exceeds marginal cost so that firms make profits from incremental sales, these consumers stop purchasing. The excess of price over marginal cost is ensured by the assumption that a is smaller than 1, so that firms care more about profits than consumer welfare. It follows that, for large enough ¯, a firm that charges more than p a¯ loses a fraction of its customers and faces a demand equal to 1 - ho 1 - p2o/Y . Its objective function is then 1 - W2o a p2o so that its welfare-maximizing value of p2o is p a . For a firm with a < a¯, the only pertinent choices are thus p a¯ and p a , with the former being more attractive if and only if a > 0, where

a = W2o a p a¯ - 1 - W2o a p a

ho Y - c¯ 2 1 - a¯ + a/2

=Y

2 - a¯ 2

- 1-

1 - a/2 2-a 2

>0

(6)

and the second equality is established in the appendix.

Consider the simple case where firms are either selfish so that a = 0 or have an altruism parameter a equal to a¯ > 0, the level expected by altruismsensitive consumers. Selfish firms then face the choice between the selfish price Y + c¯ /2 and the altruistic price Y 1 - a¯ + c¯ / 2 - a¯ . Since W is equal to profits for these firms,

0

ho =

Y - c¯ 2 Y

1 - a¯ 1 - 2 - a¯ 2 - 4

This is declining in a¯. For any > 0, there is thus a critical value of a¯ > 0 such that 0 > 0 for any a¯ smaller than this critical value. Rotemberg (2011) shows numerically that fairly modest levels of lead to 0 > 0 for nontrivial levels of a¯. In other words, small numbers of anger-prone consumers are sufficient to lead even selfish firms to behave like altruistic ones.
To close this section, consider the case where the evidence from earlier periods leads to the rejection of the hypothesis that a firm's altruism level was greater than or equal to a¯. Altruism-sensitive consumers then set equal to ¯ in the second period regardless of the firm's current price, so the firm's demand is 1 - ho · 1 - p2o/Y . The cost in this market from taking an earlier action that allows altruism-sensitive consumers to reject the hypothesis that a firm is altruistic thus equals a . As we shall see below, this cost of being seen as selfish contributes to the provision of highquality new goods.
For the moment, notice that when 0 > 0, both selfish firms and firms with a = a¯ find it optimal to charge p a¯ in period 0 also. The reason is that higher prices lead to losses even larger than 0 itself.

3. The Introduction of a New Good
by an Unrelated Brand
In this section, a firm without an old good decides whether or not to spend the setup cost so that its new good is of high quality. This section shows that altruistic firms are more likely to provide high-quality goods than selfish firms. Moreover, an increase in the extent to which consumers expect firms to be altruistic increases the range of parameters for which altruistic firms produce high-quality goods. This result is crucial for the analysis that follows. Consumers' expectation of altruism thus matters also.
There are hn potential consumers for the new good. If the good is of high quality, a fraction F of the hn consumers values it at or less so that can be interpreted again as an individual's valuation of the quality embodied in the new good. For simplicity, I consider a situation in which low-quality goods would not be produced under full information. I thus suppose that consumers value them at L, which can

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

330

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

be negative and is definitely below the marginal cost
of their production c¯. To express the utility received by an individual consumer belonging to hn, let I h and Il be indicator functions. These take a value of 1 if
the consumer buys a high-quality new good or a low-
quality new good, respectively, and take a value of 0
otherwise. Because the consumer does not buy more than one unit of the new good, I h + I l is, at most, equal to 1. Supposing that the consumer pays p1n for a newly introduced good, his actual material payoffs are

I h + I lL - p1n

(7)

A different indicator variable, H , equals 1 with probability and equals 0 otherwise. When it equals 0, the firm is unable to introduce the new good. By contrast, when it equals 1, it can introduce either a low- or a high-quality new good. The reason to set < 1 is to ensure that, as in real-world markets, new goods are not introduced in every period. From a modeling point of view, it implies that the nonintroduction of a good by a firm is not informative about the firm's altruism. Even so, most of the analysis is concerned with situations where H = 1 so that firms have a nontrivial product introduction decision. Before analyzing the product introduction decision of Period 1, I study its effects on Period 2.

3.1. Period 2
If the new good is known in Period 2 to be of high quality, purchasing the good raises the material payoffs of people with  p2n. If no one is angry, the quantity demanded d2n equals

d2n = hn 1 - F p2n

(8)

Using the same simplification as in the previous sec-
tion, let also be uniform between 0 and Y . The
analysis is then the same as that for the old good in Period 2, so that consumer surplus B2n is given by the expression in (2) with p2o replaced by p2n and ho by hn.
The Period 2 welfare from selling a new good of
high quality is thus

W2n a p2n = hn

1

-

p2n Y

p2n - c¯

a Y - p2n + 2Y

2

(9)

which equals hnW2o a p2n /ho. As a result, the optimal price p2n for a firm with
altruism parameter a¯ equals p a¯ in (5). Its resulting
level of Period 2 welfare is W2n a¯ p a¯ , which is denoted by W2n a¯ . For a selfish firm, the equilibrium value of p2n also equals p a¯ if 0  0, whereas it equals p 0 if 0 < 0. In the former case, its
Period 2 welfare W2n 0 equals W2n 0 p a¯ , whereas it equals 1 - W2n 0 p 0 in the latter. In either case, W2n a¯ > W2n 0 . One reason this occurs is that when > 0, the altruistic firm is able to charge its

optimal price without fear of punishment. Even when = 0 and there are no punishments, the altruistic firm
obtains more welfare because it enjoys vicariously the welfare of its consumers.

3.2. Period 1
This is the period in which the new firm must make a quality choice. Although consumers do not know the quality of the good they buy, firms do. A firm's assessment of consumer surplus therefore depends on this quality. Consumer surplus also depends on the price consumers pay and the quantity they purchase, although these two variables are linked via the consumer's equilibrium demand curve. Consumer surplus as seen by the firm can thus be written as a function of only price and quality. Let B1n p1n high denote this surplus when quality is high, and let B1n p1n low denote it when quality is low. Most of the analysis of this subsection is carried out under the assumption that = 0 so that no firm is punished for providing low quality. In this case, an entrant with altruism parameter a (equal to either a¯ or 0) prefers to produce a high-quality good rather than a low-quality good in Period 1 if

W2n a + a B1n p1n high - B1n p1n low 

(10)

The entrant also has the option of not producing
any goods at all, and this also avoids saddling con-
sumers with a low-quality good. By not producing, the firm forgoes the profits q1n p1n - c¯ where q1n is the quantity sold. Therefore, the entrant prefers to pro-
duce a high-quality good rather than not producing
the new good if

W2n a + aB1n p1n high + q1n p1n - c¯ 

(11)

Finally, the entrant prefers to produce a low-quality good to not producing the new good if

aB1n p1n low + q1n p1n - c¯ > 0

(12)

A Nash equilibrium where all entrants supply highquality products exists if a price p1n can be found such that when demand is given by (8), the entering firm does not wish to deviate from this price while both (10) and (11) are satisfied. This equilibrium involves some coordination between the actions of producers and the beliefs of consumers, because demand is only given by (8) if consumers believe that high quality is forthcoming.
Consider first the benchmark case in which all entrants are selfish and = 0, so that brands are not punished for their selfishness. In this case,

Proposition 1. If = 0 and all firms have a = 0, entrants provide high-quality goods if and only if

W2n 0 p 0 

(13)

If this condition is satisfied, the equilibrium price is p 0 .

Proofs are in the appendix.

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

331

The quantity W2n 0 equals the profits in the second period for a firm charging the (selfish) monopoly price. High quality is thus provided only when these future profits, which would disappear if quality were low, cover the firm's setup costs.6 When consumers know this to be true, they expect high quality so that the firm finds it optimal to set the resulting monopoly price.
I now proceed to show that altruistic firms may provide high-quality goods even when (13) is violated. Because altruistic firms obtain vicarious utility from providing high quality, they have less to gain from failing to do so. This is reflected in the fact that the expressions on the left-hand side of (10) and (11) are increasing in a for any combination of p1n and q1n. As a result, these constraints can be satisfied for a = a¯ > 0 even if (13) is violated. A simple case where this occurs is when W2n 0 < < W2n a¯ . Since B1n is nonnegative and B1n p1n high is no smaller than B1n p1n low , this is enough to ensure that both conditions are satisfied for a firm with altruism a¯. For the analysis below, it is helpful to obtain weaker conditions for a high-quality product to be offered. Proposition 2 provides such conditions for the case in which consumers expect all firms to be altruistic and use the price to rationally infer whether firms will provide high-quality goods.

Proposition 2. Let denote c¯ - L while

p~1n

=

c¯

+

1

a -

a

(14)

Suppose, moreover, that is small enough that

p~1n < p a¯

(15)

Suppose that consumers believe that all firms have an altruism parameter a¯ and believe that high quality is forthcoming only if altruistic firms have no incentive to deviate from this. A necessary and sufficient condition for there to be an equilibrium in which firms with an altruism parameter a¯ provide high-quality goods is then

W2n

a¯

hn +Y

a¯

Y - p~1n 2

2

+

Y - p~1n

p~1n - c¯



(16)

Unless

W2n

a¯

hn +Y

a¯ Y - p a¯ 2

2
+ Y - p a¯

p a¯ - c¯



holds also, which is a stronger condition, altruistic firms charge a price below p a¯ .

6 Here, quality provision is helped by patience. Because employees eventually leave, it may be harder to obtain "patient employees" than ones that intrinsically like customers. Even leaving aside whether customers would be as happy with a patient firm as with a caring one, it may thus be difficult to convincingly build a reputation for patience.

Because (16) is substantially weaker than (13), this proposition shows that high quality can be sustained by altruistic firms more easily than by selfish ones. Interestingly, however, altruistic brands may be forced to charge less than their preferred price p a¯ to sustain high quality. By cutting the price below p a¯ , sales increase, and the vicarious losses from selling low rather than high quality increase. This deters the firm from selling low quality and thereby convinces customers that high quality is forthcoming.
Proposition 2 requires consumers to believe that all firms are altruistic, and these beliefs are rational only if, indeed, all firms are. It is presumably more common for consumers to be less confident about firms' altruism. Suppose, then, that consumers believe that the probability that a firm has an altruism parameter a¯ equals  1, whereas they expect the firm to be selfish with probability 1 - . If (13) is satisfied, all firms provide high-quality goods, so the more interesting case arises when this condition is violated. The issue, then, is how altruistic firms are affected by a decline of (from the value of 1). It turns out that, for certain changes in , altruistic firms continue to provide high-quality goods. For others, high quality is unsustainable even if the conditions of Proposition 2 are satisfied.
There are two different types of equilibria in which altruistic firms provide high-quality goods. In the first, the equilibrium price is above c¯ so that selfish firms also charge this price and sell goods of low quality. In the second, the equilibrium price is below c¯ so that selfish firms produce nothing. First consider the former. Because customers expect high quality only from a fraction of firms, their expected utility from a purchase of the new good is + 1 - L. As a result, only those consumers for whom this is greater than or equal to p1n buy, and demand is

d1n = hn

1 - p1n -

1- Y

L

(17)

This is increasing in , and the resulting increase in demand turns out to raise altruists' desire to provide high-quality goods. It does so by raising both the vicarious benefit from selling high-quality goods and the vicarious loss from providing low quality. Proposition 3 demonstrates this formally.

Proposition 3. Suppose that is small enough that

p~1n < p a¯

Y 1 - a¯ + c¯ + 1 - L 1 - a¯ 1 - 1/



2 - a¯ 2 - 1/

(18)

Suppose that consumers believe that a fraction of firms has an altruism parameter a¯ whereas the rest have an altruism parameter of 0. Suppose further that they believe that

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

332

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

high quality is forthcoming from altruistic firms if these have no incentive to deviate from this. A necessary and sufficient condition for there to be an equilibrium in which firms with an altruism parameter a¯ provide high-quality goods at a price above c¯ is

W2n

a¯

hn +Y

a¯

Y p~1n- 1-

L/

- p~1n d

+ Y - p~1n - 1 - L p~1n - c¯ 

(19)

Moreover, reductions in lower the left-hand side of (19), so they make high quality harder to sustain.
This proposition shows that altruists find it easier to supply high-quality products as consumers expect more firms to be altruistic. In the limit where they expect all firms to be altruistic, (19) coincides with (16) so that Proposition 2 applies. If (16) holds as a strict inequality, small reductions in below 1 still lead (19) to hold so that altruistic firms provide highquality goods whereas selfish firms do not. Notice that although Proposition 3 does not require consumer beliefs regarding to be correct, it is consistent with this form of rationality.
Proposition 3 covers the case where the price is above c¯ so that selfish firms enter with low quality. Now consider the possibility of an equilibrium with a price below c¯. Because selfish firms stay out, this low price lets altruists signal their quality.7
To set the stage for this case, note that there exist values of small enough that demand disappears even at a price equal to c¯. At these values of , the right-hand side of (17) is nonpositive when p1n equals c¯. Using (17), these values of satisfy

Y + - c¯ 

(20)

If (20) is satisfied, there is no equilibrium where firms provide high-quality goods at a price p1n greater than or equal to c¯. However, any firm selling the new good at a price slightly below c¯ must be altruistic and must be providing high quality; otherwise, they would make losses in period 1 and sell nothing in period 2. An altruistic firm charging less than c¯ thus has a demand given by (8). It thus provides high quality if (10) and (11) are satisfied. The proof of Proposition 2 shows that, in this case, (11) is tighter than (10) because c¯ is smaller than p~1n. Still, (11) is easier to meet than the condition (13) that leads selfish firms to provide high-quality goods, so equilibria of this sort exist.

7 One reason this signaling equilibrium with low prices is interesting is that it provides a contrast with signaling models such as Bagwell and Riordan (1991) and Judd and Riordan (1994), where high quality is signaled with high prices.

To this point, the discussion in this section has been carried out setting = 0 so that consumers do not become angry if firms are insufficiently altruistic. Positive values of have no effect on altruistic firms, because these are already acting in accord with the expectations of altruism-sensitive consumers. They do, however, reduce selfish entrants' incentive to provide high-quality goods. More specifically, they lower the period 2 profits W2n 0 that accrue to selfish firms that provide high-quality goods. The reason is that a positive requires them to either charge a price they regard as suboptimal or lose a fraction 1 - of their customers. The effect of this is to tighten the condition (13), which is needed according to Proposition 1 to yield high quality from selfish firms.
The analysis so far has assumed that brands are altruistic either toward all hn potential consumers of the new good or toward none. It is worth noting, however, that altruism toward customers who do not buy the good is immaterial for equilibrium behavior. Thus, the analysis would have been the same if the parameter a for altruistic firms was positive only for individuals with a valuation larger than -, where
- represents the smallest that leads to an equilibrium purchase.
4. The Introduction of a New Good by a Related Brand
If all firms were known to be selfish and were 0 so that this was acceptable, Proposition 1 would determine quality choice whether or not the old good was sold under the same brand as the new one. The match between goods would play no role. On the other hand, the analysis in the previous section has established that brands that are more altruistic toward a particular group of customers are more likely to introduce high-quality goods aimed at this group. The result is that customers who find themselves buying a high-quality good should adjust upward their expectation of this brand's altruism toward themselves. This would be particularly true if consumers knew that selfish firms would have offered a low-quality good but should extend also to settings in which consumers are ex ante uncertain about the quality sold by selfish firms. With this as the background, consider the introduction of the new good n by the brand that sells the old high-quality good o.
Imagine first that there is no overlap between ho and hn or, equivalently, that there is no overlap between the ho 1 - -/Y people who purchased the old good (where - is the smallest that leads to a purchase) and the hn 1 - -/Y individuals that might purchase the new good. In this case, the purchasers of the new good have no reason to expect altruism toward them from the brand selling good n. Their

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

333

subjective probability of altruism should thus be quite low.
Contrast this with the extreme opposite case, where the two customer segments overlap perfectly, so that the ho 1 - -/Y purchasers of the old good coincide with the hn 1 - -/Y purchasers of the new one. These purchasers would seem justified in assuming that is higher, so that they should regard this brand as more likely to be altruistic. This belief in the altruism of the brand would obviously be reinforced if the old good was sold at the price that altruistic firms would wish to charge. Once consumers believe that
is larger, Proposition 3 implies that an equilibrium where altruistic firms provide high-quality goods is more likely to be possible. In some cases, the increase in makes an equilibrium with high quality possible when it was impossible before. The demand for the brand extension at this high-quality equilibrium is then much larger than the demand for an equivalent product from a new brand. Even if an equilibrium where altruistic firms provide high-quality goods exists also for new entrants, (17) implies that an increase in raises the demand for the brand extension relative to the demand for a product with a new brand.
This shows that the extra demand for brand extensions from brands that have successful incumbent products directed at the same customers does not require customer anger at brands whose extensions have low quality. Moreover, this extra demand is rational insofar as many firms with a high-quality incumbent good are, in fact, altruistic toward the customers of this good. In spite of this, I now turn to an analysis of the effects of setting > 0 on quality and demand.
It might at first be thought that this modification has no effect on altruistic firms, because these never do anything that triggers anger. In fact, they are affected, albeit indirectly. The possibility of angering customers has a direct effect on selfish firms, because these firms now fear the consequences of providing low quality. Because this increases equilibrium demand, it turns out that altruistic firms also face an increased incentive to provide high-quality goods.
Consumer anger has a much more limited role if an existing brand provides an extension aimed at a group of customers that does not purchase its original product. In this case, buyers of good n cannot reduce their purchases of the old good if the new good is of low quality. Furthermore, purchasers of the old good have little reason for anger in this case. Thus, angry reactions to defective brand extensions would seem to be more important if the brand extension fits with the brand's original product. The evidence in Ohbuchi et al. (2004) that a high level of expected altruism inclines people to be more angry at selfish acts is also

more relevant in this case.8 Although this evidence comes from a quite different domain, it seems reasonable to suppose that it could also apply to brands. It would then be the case that a successful brand that introduces an extension aimed at its existing customers risks angering them if the extension is deemed to be of low quality.
I thus focus on a situation in which the customers for the old and the new good coincide, and these customers expect the brand to act as if it were altruistic. In other words, the fraction of altruism-sensitive consumers reacts with anger if the firm fails to act in the way that an altruistic firm would. The first issue, then, is the choice of quality by selfish firms. If altruism-sensitive customers become angry at the provision of low quality, firms that introduce a lowquality good lose 0 in the second period, where
is now assumed to be large enough that this is positive.
Thus, the condition under which selfish firms prefer producing high quality rather than low quality ceases to be (10) and becomes

W2n 0 p a¯ + 0 

(21)

The first term in (21) is smaller than the left-hand side of (13) because the existence of altruism-sensitive consumers forces selfish firms to charge p a¯ instead of their optimal price p 0 . Still, for a value of a¯ sufficiently small (so that W2n 0 p 0 is not much larger than W2n 0 p a¯ ) and a value of sufficiently large (so 0 is large), (21) is easier to meet than (13). In this case, selfish firms now find it more attractive to provide high quality rather than low. Similarly, the condition under which such a firm prefers to produce a low-quality good rather than not producing the new good at all is no longer (12) and is instead

q1n p1n - c¯ - 0 > 0

(22)

Finally, condition (11), which ensures that selfish firms prefer producing a high-quality good to not producing the new good, can now be written as

W2n 0 p a¯ + q1n p1n - c¯ 

(23)

The changes in these conditions make it easier for equilibria to exist where high-quality goods are produced, even by altruistic firms. This is demonstrated in Propositions 4 and 5.
Proposition 4. Consider a price p1n = p¯, which leads altruistic firms to provide high-quality goods when consumers expect = 1. Even if the actual probability that

8 They show that people are angered when, for example, people who are close to them engage in actions that do not take proper account of their feelings, whereas anger is less likely to be triggered in response to such behavior from people who are less close.

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

334

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

firms are altruistic is less than 1, there exists an equilibrium in which all incumbent firms provide high-quality new products at this price as long as (a) (21) is satisfied and (b) (23) is satisfied when q1n is given by F n 1 - p¯/Y . At this equilibrium, consumer beliefs regarding quality are rational.
The earlier discussion implies that if a¯ is sufficiently small, (23) with a price p1n equal to p¯ is easier to satisfy than (13). When (21) is weaker than (13) as well, the proposition says that an equilibrium where selfish firms provide high-quality goods is more easily achieved when these firms have an incumbent highquality product than when they do not. This proposition thus covers a case where some firms provide high-quality goods not because they are altruistic but because they are expected to be, and they are better off acting as if they were.9
In Proposition 5, (23) is violated so that selfish firms are not induced to supply high-quality products. Nonetheless, consumer anger continues to play a role in expanding the provision of high-quality goods by altruistic incumbents. The reason is that it deters selfish firms from introducing the good at all. In particular,
Proposition 5. Let p^1n denote the minimum of the critical price p~1n, and the price that makes (22) hold as an equality when q1n is given by F n 1 - p1n/Y . Then, if (10) and (11) are satisfied for a = a¯ at this price and (23) is not, there exists an equilibrium in which consumers rationally expect high quality at this price, altruistic firms provide this high-quality good, and selfish firms do not sell the new good.
What occurs here is that the fear of losing customers for its old good is sufficient to ensure that selfish firms do not provide low quality, although it is not enough to actually lead them to produce highquality new goods. Nonetheless, the lack of low quality provision by selfish firms raises the demand for altruistic firms and thus helps them produce highquality goods.
Recall that when new goods were provided by new entrants, altruists had to charge a price below c¯ to prevent selfish firms from selling low-quality goods in the case where (13) was violated. When the new good is sold by incumbent firms, selfish firms require a price premium above c¯ to sell a low-quality good (because doing so leads to a loss in period 2). The fact that selfish firms are now deterred even with
9 There is an interesting contrast between Proposition 4 and the result at the end of §3 that selfish entrants are less likely to provide high-quality goods if they get punished for being insufficiently altruistic in their pricing. The production of a high-quality good as a result of pretending to be an altruist is thus operative only for firms who have already become established as high-quality producers.

a price above c¯ helps altruistic firms provide highquality goods because condition (11) becomes easier to meet as the price rises from c¯ to the critical price p~1n.
5. High-End vs. Broad Brands
The previous section showed that incumbent brands have an advantage over new entrants as long as the perception that an incumbent is altruistic toward her existing customers leads people to expect altruism toward the customers of the new good. Being perceived as altruistic can thus be regarded as an asset, a form of brand equity. This raises the question of whether the demand for a brand's new products is strictly increasing in the number of people that the brand is perceived as being altruistic toward, or whether it can be more valuable for a brand to be regarded as being altruistic only toward a limited set of customers. This section shows that the latter can be true.
Suppose that there are two types of firms. Firms of type b are altruistic toward all their potential customers, whereas firms of type x are altruistic only toward the most quality-sensitive subset of these customers. Consumers know the firms' types as a result of earlier purchases, and for this reason, I neglect both the existence of selfish firms and the possibility that consumers will be angry at firms that provide insufficient quality. Because both types of firms are, in fact, altruistic toward their more qualityconscious customers, actions that are consistent with altruism toward this narrow group of customers would not induce anger, according to (1). Actions that demonstrate altruism only toward this group, and not toward less quality-conscious customers, have the potential for inducing anger among the latter. This provides an additional incentive for firms whose altruism is broader to act differently from those whose altruism is narrower. The section demonstrates that these two kinds of firms can act differently even without this additional incentive.
Consider again the situation depicted in Table 1, where firms can introduce goods between Periods 0 and 1 whose value to consumers depends on the consumer's realized value of . Now, however, the level of quality of the new good is given by a parameter m so that the value of these goods to consumers equals m .10 All consumers prefer goods with a higher value of m, and this preference is particularly strong for people whose realized is large. The key choice faced by firms in this section is whether to choose a high or low value for m. A second difference between the analysis in this section and that in the previous
10 The earlier analysis corresponds to the case where m could effectively equal only 0 or 1.

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

335

one is that the evolution of the marginal cost of production depends on the choice of m. In particular, marginal cost drops faster from Period 1 to Period 2 if m is lower.
Because consumers with higher values of are more quality sensitive, it is appealing to suppose that "high-end" firms care only about consumers with relatively high values of . To capture this, let the altruism parameter of firms of type x equal a¯ for consumers whose lies between X and Y , and let it equal 0 for consumers with lower values of . By contrast, firms of type b have an altruism parameter equal to a¯ for all their potential customers.
The demonstration that firms of type x can have more demand for brand extensions than firms of type b proceeds in two steps. The next subsection focuses on Period 2 and shows that, relative to firms of type b, firms of type x prefer higher-quality innovations even if they have a higher marginal cost of production. The following subsection then shows that, under certain circumstances, firms of type x can credibly convince their customers in Period 1 that their good is of the highest possible quality in situations where firms of type b cannot. The difficulty for firms of type b is that customers suspect that their good has been designed primarily with an eye toward future cost reductions.

5.1. Period 2
In Period 2, customers know that the good is worth
m to them. Because customers pursue only their
material rewards in this section, they purchase the good if m exceeds the price p2n. Demand is thus equal to hn 1 - p2n/mY . Adapting the analysis of §2, the logic of (2) implies that total consumer welfare is hn mY - p2n 2/2mY , whereas that of (5) implies that the optimal price for firms that care about all their
consumers is

p2b = mY

1 - a¯ 2 - a¯

+c

(24)

where c is marginal cost and the superscript b denotes the firm's type. For future reference, it is worth recording -, the lowest that still leads customers to buy. Since this equals p2n/m, it is given by

-=

1 - a¯ Y + c/m 2 - a¯

(25)

Firm welfare for a firm of type b that charges the price in (24) equals

W2b m c = hn

1

-

p2b mY

p2b - c

a¯ mY - p2b + 2mY

2

hn = mY

mY - c 2 - a¯

2

1

-

a¯ 2

(26)

where m is an explicit determinant of W2b.

The restriction that some firms care only for consumers with > X matters only if X  -, and this fits with the idea that these firms care only about the keenest consumers. As shown momentarily, these firms then sell to all individuals with  X so that total consumer surplus for these consumers equals

Y
hn m - p2n dF X

= hn

1

-

X Y

m X+Y 2

- p2n

(27)

This surplus thus equals the product of the number of buyers with between X and Y , which is hn 1-X/Y , and their average surplus, which is m X + Y /2 - pn2 .
Given this value of consumer surplus, a firm of
type x maximizes

W2x m c X = hn

1

-

p2n mY

p2n - c

+ a¯

X 1- Y

·

m X+Y 2

- p2n

(28)

in Period 2. Therefore, its optimal price is

p2x

=

mY

+ c - a¯m 2

Y

-X

(29)

Any consumer whose is greater than or equal to p2x/m buys the good, and it is immediately verified that p2x/m < X if X > -, so that, indeed, all individuals with  X buy the good. The price p2x rises with X because increases in X lead firms to care about fewer customers so that their vicarious gain from lowering their price is reduced. A firm with X = Y cares about no customers so that it acts as if its altruism parameter a¯ were equal to 0. At the opposite extreme, a firm that cares for all its customers acts as if X were equal to -, and its optimal price is (24).
One clear and unsurprising implication of (28) is that all firms are better off if either their quality m rises (which raises demand) or their marginal cost c declines. This can be verified by differentiating this equation and obtaining

dW2x m c X dm

= hn

p2x m2Y

p2x - c

a¯Y +2

1-

X Y

2

(30)

dW2x m c dc

X

= -hn

1

-

p2x mY

(31)

The first of these expressions is positive because p2n exceeds marginal cost, whereas the second is nega-
tive because demand is positive only if p2n is smaller than mY . These signs imply that one can always find

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

336

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

a combination of an increase in c and an increase in m that leaves overall firm welfare constant.
The sign of the derivatives in (30) and (31) is independent of the size of the parameters a¯ and X. It is immediately apparent, however, that the size of these derivatives depends on X both directly and indirectly through the dependence of the price p2x on X. This is the basis of the finding that increases in X starting from its lowest possible value of p2x/m raise the desirability of increasing c and m simultaneously. This is demonstrated in Proposition 6.
Proposition 6. Consider a combination of infinitesimal increases in c and m that leaves W2b unchanged when X = -. Then, this combination increases W2x X when X is strictly above -.
Reductions in c (combined with reductions in m) tend to be relatively more attractive to firms that care for all their customers for two main reasons. The first is that such firms charge lower prices and sell correspondingly more, so they obtain the savings from cost reductions on more units. Second, all consumers benefit equally from a cost reduction (through its effect on the price that they pay), whereas the benefits of an increase in m accrues disproportionately to consumers with high values of . This means that even though a firm that cares about all its consumers receives a larger total vicarious benefit from an increase in m than a firm that cares only for a subset (because all consumers gain something), its vicarious benefits from a reduction in c are relatively larger.
Although Proposition 6 deals only with marginal changes, its validity for all X > - implies that it has global implications. Suppose, in particular, that we consider any two combinations of c and m that give the same welfare to a firm that cares about all its customers equally. One can then reach the higher c m combination from the lower one by a series of infinitesimal changes, each of which leaves the broadly altruistic firm indifferent and each of which makes the narrowly altruistic firm better off. This latter firm thus strictly prefers the combination with the higher m.
Figure 1 shows this graphically for Y = 10 and a¯ = 0 5. For each m between 0.3 and 1, the top panel depicts the level of c such that the combination c m makes the value of W2b the same as when m = 1 and c = 5. The bottom panel then depicts both W b (which is a constant) and W x for a particular X when c varies with m as it does in the top panel. The value of X is chosen so that the narrowly altruistic firm cares only for those consumers that buy when m = 1 and c = 5 and the price is set according to (24). At this point, both types of firms care about the same customers, so the two welfare levels are identical. For the combinations with lower m and c, the firm that

Firm welfare c

Figure 1 Variations in m and c That Keep W b Constant

5

4

3

2

1

0

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

m

0.85

0.84

0.83 Cares for all 0.82

0.81

Cares only for top X

0.80

0.79

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

m

cares about the most quality-conscious consumers is worse off. It should be noted, however, that the reductions in firm welfare are modest even though the changes in cost and quality considered in Figure 1 are substantial.
Figure 2 depicts the converse situation. For the same Y and a¯, it lets c vary with m so that W x is unaffected. Again, X is chosen so that both firms get the same welfare when m and c are at the highest values under consideration. Now, however, reductions in m are matched by reductions in c that keep W x constant. This means that W b rises with c, because a firm that cares for all its consumers benefits more from simultaneous reductions in c and m.
This subsection has thus demonstrated that it is possible to find two c m combinations such that firms of type b derive more welfare in Period 2 from the one with lower m, whereas those of type x derive

Firm welfare c

Figure 2 Variations in m and c That Keep W x Constant

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

m

0.90

0.88

0.86

Cares for all

0.84 Cares only for top X

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

m

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

337

more Period 2 welfare from the one with higher m. This is not a general result, and there are, of course, numerous pairs of c m combinations that lead both types of firms to prefer the same one. The model does make testable predictions, however, as to when the two kinds of firms have the same preferences and when they do not.

5.2. Period 1
The purpose of this section is to show that under some circumstances, firms of type x introduce extensions with a value of m, mH , that exceeds the value of m, mL, embodied in the extensions of firms of type b. This results in a higher demand for the extension of firms of type x. This is an equilibrium result that is driven by the customer's expectation of altruism, where this expectation is influenced by both by the firm's previous offering and by its current price. These expectations are central because, by assumption, both types of firms are equally capable of producing either of these goods. The marginal cost of the goods with quality mL and mH in Period 2 are, respectively, cL and cH , where cL < cH . For illustration, suppose that both goods have a marginal cost of cH in the first period, although this is not essential for the results. Finally, the Period 1 setup costs for these two goods are L and H .
The previous subsection established that there exist combinations of parameters such that, once the welfare functions W2b m c and W2x m c X have been maximized with respect to their respective prices, they satisfy

W2b mL cL > W2b mH cH

(32)

W2x mL cL X < W2x mH cH X

For the numerical example considered above, these inequalities are satisfied when cH = 5, cL = 1 43, mH = 1, and mL = 0 5. With these parameters, welfare is about 2% higher for the broadly altruistic firm when it has low costs and low quality rather than high costs and high quality. For a firm that cares only about the equilibrium purchasers of the good with high cost and high quality, welfare is about onethird of 1% lower when it has low costs and low quality instead.
In the analysis so far, Periods 1 and 2 have been treated as having the same demand, and discounting between the periods has been neglected. However, the length of time during which the quality of a good is relatively uncertain might well be different from the length of time during which this quality is relatively well understood and the good continues to be sold. Indeed, one can imagine that for many products the uncertainty dissolves quickly relative to the life of the product. In this case, the present value of the

welfare the firm obtains from the new product can be written as

W i = W1i + W2i i = b x

The parameter captures both discounting and the relative sales, or length, of Periods 1 and 2.11
One difference between Periods 1 and 2 is that
consumers do not know m in the former. Letting me denote consumers' expectation of m, consumer demand is hn 1 - p1n/ meY . The welfare in Period 1 of a broadly altruistic firm that introduces a good of quality m at a price p1n is then

W1b m me p1n

= hn

1

-

p1n me Y

= hn

1

-

p1n me Y

Y
p1n - cH + a p1n/me

m - p1n d Y

p1n - cH

+a

mY 2+

2me - m 2Y me

p1n
2

2

- p1n

(33)

The price that maximizes this is

p1b

m

me

meY 1 - a¯ + cH = 2 1 - a¯ + a¯m/me

(34)

This price rises with perceived quality because this increases demand. It is declining in actual quality, however, because an increase in quality leads altruistic firms to obtain more vicarious benefits from each sale. They thus lower their prices to increase total sales. Notice that, by contrast, an increase in actual quality would have no effect on the price of selfish firms because it affects neither cost nor demand.
Differentiating (33) with respect to me yields

dW1b dme

= hn

p1n me 2Y

p1n - cH + ap1n

m me - 1

(35)

Optimal pricing by firms ensures that p1n > cH , so that this expression is positive for me smaller than a value exceeding m. A reduction in me (for given m)
leads consumers to lower their purchases. This has
only a second-order effect on consumer welfare when m = me because consumers are then receiving zero
surplus from marginal purchases. For firms, by con-
trast, the reduction in purchases represents a first-
order reduction in profits. The result is that, as long as mL and mH are not too far apart, both firms supplying quality mH and firms supplying quality mL prefer to be seen as supplying quality mH .

11 Suppose Period 2 consists of segments, each of which has the same demand as Period 1. Further, let ~ denote the discount rate between consecutive segments as well as between Period 1 and the first segment of Period 2. Then = ~ 1 - ~ / 1 - ~ , which rises with and ~.

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

338

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

Supposing that all consumers with  X buy the good, the Period 1 welfare of a narrowly altruistic equals

W1x m me p1n X

= hn

1

-

p1n me Y

Y
p1n - cH + a¯ X

m - p1n d Y

= hn

1

-

p1n me Y

p1n - cH

+ a¯

1

-

X Y

m X+Y 2

- p1n

(36)

Differentiating with respect to p1n, the optimal price p1x m me depends only on me and is given by the expression in (29) with m replaced by me. The earlier
analysis leads again to the conclusion that all con-
sumers with  X buy the good if X  -. Inspection of (36) also shows that the derivative of W1x with respect to me is positive.
Because firms have nothing to gain by pretending to be offering quality mL, a firm that offers this quality can charge the price that maximizes W i mL mL p
with respect to p, where i equals either b or x. Let pLi denote this price, which equals either p1b mL mL or p1x mL mL . By contrast, consumers would only believe that a firm is offering a good of quality mH at a price pHi if they are certain that the firm has no incentive to deviate and offer quality mL instead. Thus, provision of quality mH is possible only if

W1i mH mH pHi - W1i mL mL pLi

+

W2i mH cH - W2i mL cL

H

L

-

W1i mH mH pHi - W1i mL mH pHi

+

W2i mH cH - W2i mL cL

H

L

-

(37) (38)

where i equals either b or x. The first of these condi-
tions says that the firm prefers to provide high-quality good at pHi , with consumers believing that quality is mH , to providing low quality at pLi when this price leads consumers to believe that quality is mL. This can
be thought of as ensuring that the firm does not want
to deviate in an overt way from providing high qual-
ity. The second of these conditions requires the firm to
suffer a loss when it sells low rather than high quality at the price pHi even if the fact that it keeps the price constant at pHi leads consumers to believe that the firm provides high quality. This condition pre-
vents the firm from making a covert deviation in the
quality it provides.
When these conditions are met, it is possible to sustain an outcome with high quality if the price is pHi . Among all outcomes with this level of quality, firms
of type i prefer the one that makes the left-hand side
of (37) as large as possible, and this is a natural choice
for an equilibrium price (because firms have no incen-
tive to deviate from this price). It is also worth noting

that these conditions imply that firms of type i prefer all the outcomes with prices that lead quality to be equal to mH to the feasible outcomes where quality equals mL so that, again, it seems reasonable to suppose that the equilibrium will take this form.
Proposition 7. When (32) is satisfied, one can always find values of and H - L such that there exists no price that induces a rational expectations equilibrium in which firms of type b supply a good of quality mH . At the same time, there does exist a rational expectations equilibrium in which firms of type x do so and charge p1x mH mH .
This proposition captures the idea that demand for new products from narrowly altruistic firms can be higher than demand for new products from broadly altruistic ones. In particular, it shows that, for certain model parameters, there exists an equilibrium price pHx such that narrowly altruistic firms sell hn 1 - pHx / mH Y units. Because broadly altruistic firms would be expected to sell a good of quality mL, they would sell hn 1 - pHx / mLY units, which is fewer, if they (counterfactually) charged this price.
6. Conclusions
This paper has sought to show that the association of a brand with altruism for a particular group of consumers can explain some consumer attitudes for branded products. It can explain why consumers are quick to accept certain new product offerings from particular brands while meeting others with suspicion. The model also suggests a reason for why brands may find it more difficult to "move up" and acquire associations with higher quality than to "move down" and generate demand by consumers with limited quality sensitivity. The reason is that people expect high quality not so much from brands that they regard as having a particular affection for themselves, but rather from brands that they regard as devoted to the most quality-sensitive purchasers.
In a sense, the model offers a formalization of the idea of "brand image," which is captured here by the expectations that consumers have about the groups of people toward whom the brand is altruistic. Whether this particular definition of brand image fully captures a brand's extensibility remains an open empirical question. The importance of the brand associations stressed in Aaker and Keller (1990) might suggest that it does not. They show, for example, that their survey respondents expect a potential Vidal Sassoon extension into perfume to be of relatively low quality, with some saying that "it smells like shampoo." Still, skepticism about this extension might be rationalizable along the lines of this paper if the group of customers that purchases Vidal Sassoon shampoo does not overlap neatly with any group of consumers

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

339

that has common objectives when it comes to perfume. If no group of people with common perfume desires expects Vidal Sassoon to particularly care for them, the forces discussed in the current paper could keep the demand for Vidal Sassoon perfume modest and subject the brand to only weak pressure to produce a high-quality perfume. To study this issue more formally, however, the model would have to be extended so that it covers a richer pattern of partial overlaps between the consumer segments targeted by brand extensions and the purchasers of the brand's original products.
The paper draws a sharp distinction between extensions that are not received warmly and extensions that elicit anger. The latter are more likely when consumers flock to an extension thinking the brand cares for them and then find the product disappointing. Because this anger can hurt the sales of the brand's original products, this outcome may well be more costly than a failure of the extension to catch on. It would thus seem important to develop survey methods that can detect the potential for such anger.
Although not asking directly about this anger, Milberg et al. (1997) provide some evidence suggesting that the sensitivity of consumers to the quality of brand extensions depends on the relationship between the extension and the brand's original product. They collect data on attitudes toward brands after people read articles describing these extensions. Not surprisingly, their data show that people who read a neutral description of an extension report more favorable views about the brand than people who read that the extension was of bad quality. What is more interesting, and more closely related to the current paper, is that this impact of quality on brand perceptions is much larger when the extension is "similar" than when it is not. In their paper, similarity is related but not identical to overlap between the groups being targeted by the brand's products, so it would be worthwhile to extend their method of analysis so that it speaks more directly to the model presented here.

Acknowledgments The author thanks Mary Burke, Stephan Meier, and Christina Wang for conversations; Zhaoning Wang for research assistance; Ganesh Iyer, the editor Preyas Desai, and the review team for comments; and the Harvard Business School Division of Research for support.

Appendix. Derivations and Proofs

Derivation of a . Using the formula in (5) to substitute for both p a¯ and p a in (6), one obtains

a ho

=

1

-

c¯

+ 2

1- - a¯

a¯ Y

Y

c¯ + 1 - a¯ 2 - a¯

Y

- c¯

a + 2Y

Y

-

c¯

+

1 - a¯ 2 - a¯

Y

2

- 1-

1

-

c¯

+ 2

1- -a

a Y

Y

c¯ + 1 - a 2-a

Y

- c¯

a + 2Y

Y

-

c¯

+

1-a 2-a

Y

2

After rearranging, this becomes

a

1 - a¯ Y - c¯ 2 a Y - c¯ 2

ho = 2 - a¯ 2Y + 2Y 2 - a¯

- 1-

1 - a Y - c¯ 2 a 2 - a 2Y + 2Y

Y - c¯ 2 2-a

and the expression in the text follows.
Proof of Proposition 1. Suppose first that (13) is satisfied. Because selfish firms are not punished for charging p 0 , they would charge this price in period 2 if their good were of good quality. Condition (10) follows. Moreover, regardless of consumer beliefs concerning quality, sales are nonnegative at prices above c¯. This leads (11) to be satisfied for all such prices. Therefore, the entrant prefers entering with high quality and a price above c¯ to any alternative course of action. Knowing this, consumers expect high quality at any price above c¯, so the equilibrium price is p 0 also in period 1.
Conversely, the violation of (13) implies that (10) is violated as well, so the firm prefers low quality to high quality at any price.
Proof of Proposition 2. First note that the utility function (7) implies that consumers lose L - p1n = c¯ - - p1n for each low-quality unit that they buy at a price of p1n. We thus have

B1n p1n low = c¯ - - p1n q1n

(39)

Conditions (11) and (10) are thus identical when p1n satisfies
a p1n - c¯ + q1n = p1n - c¯ q1n
which is true when p1n is given by p~1n. As a result, the violation of (16) implies that both (10) and (11) are violated at p~1n if demand is given by (8). Thus, high quality is not provided even if consumers expect new goods to be of high
quality. I now show that when (16) is violated, high quality
cannot be provided at any other price either. For high quality to be provided at a price p1n > p~1n,
(10) would have to be true when demand is given by (8)
so that

W2n

a¯

hn + a¯

Y -p1n 2Y

2

- a¯

hn

1

-

p1n Y

c¯- -p1n



(40)

The derivative of the left-hand side of (40) with respect to the price p1n is

a¯hn

Y - p1n 1 - Y +Y

c¯ -

- p1n +

1

-

p1n Y

a¯hn =Y

c¯ -

- p1n

This is negative as long as firms do not charge prices below
c¯ - . Since c¯ - is below the critical price, increasing the price above p~1n does not lead high quality to be sustainable when (16) is violated.

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

340

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

For high quality to be provided at a price p1n < p~1n, (11) would have to be satisfied when demand is given by (8)
so that

W2n

a¯

hn + a¯

Y - p1n 2Y

2
+ hn

1

-

p1n Y

p1n - c¯ 

(41)

The left-hand side of this inequality is maximized when p1n equals p a¯ . Moreover, because the expression is quadratic in the price, it declines monotonically as the price
is lowered below this. This means that lowering the price below p~1n does not make it possible to sustain high quality when (16) is violated.
The analysis above shows that when the price is raised above p~1n, (11) is satisfied whenever (10) is. As the price is raised, the left-hand side of (10) declines. Let p¯ be equal
to p a¯ if (10) is satisfied for p a¯ when demand is given
by (8). If (10) is not satisfied in this case, let p¯ be the highest
price consistent with (40), and thus with (10).
I now show that when (16) is satisfied, there is an equi-
librium in which firms provide high-quality goods and
charge p¯. First, if consumers expect high quality at p¯, their
demand is given by (8), and both (10) and (11) are satis-
fied, so the firm wishes to provide a high-quality good. The
only remaining issue is whether the firm wishes to charge
a different price. When p¯ equals p a¯ , all other prices give lower welfare to firms. When it is not, lowering p1n below p¯ lowers the firm's welfare (since p a¯ is above p¯). Raising p1n above p¯ leads consumers to expect low quality (because (10) would be violated if demand were given by (8)). This too lowers firm welfare because it implies a W1n of 0.

Proof of Proposition 3. Note first that B1n p1n low is still given by (39) so that p~1n still gives the price at which the left-hand sides of (10) and (11) are equal. Furthermore,
the willingness of consumers to buy only if + 1 - L is greater than or equal to p1n implies that

B1n

p1n

high

hn =Y

Y p1n- 1- L /

- p1n d

Taking into account the demand function (17), it follows
that (19) represents condition (11) at the price p~1n. Thus, if (19) is violated, high quality cannot be provided at this
price. The left-hand side of (19) is quadratic in p~1n and reaches a maximum at p a¯ . To see this, replace p~1n by p in (19) and differentiate with respect to p, which yields

hn -a¯ p - 1 - Y

L -p

- a¯

Y - p- 1-

L

+Y

p- -

1-

L p - c¯ -

Setting this to 0 implies that p equals to p a¯ . Because this is above p~1n, lowering p1n below p~1n does not make it possible to satisfy (11) when (19) is violated.
When (19) is violated, raising the price above p~1n leads to a failure of (10). To see this, note that (39) and the expression for B1n p1n high above imply that (10) is given by

W2n

a¯

a¯hn +Y

Y p1n- 1- L /

- p1n d - c¯ - - p1n · Y - p~1n - 1 - L 

The derivative of the left-hand side of this equation with respect to p1n simplifies so that it equals

a¯hn 2Y

c¯ - - p1n

which is negative for any price above c¯ - . Because this is below p~1n, it follows that raising the price above p~1n leads (10) to continue to be violated when (19) is violated.
When (19) does hold, consumers rationally expect high quality from altruistic firms if firms charge this price. Using the same steps as in the proof of Proposition 2, it follows that the equilibrium price is either the highest price that leads (10) to hold or p a¯ , whichever is lower. At this price, consumers continue to expect high quality from altruistic firms, and altruistic firms find it in their interest to supply this.
Finally, the derivative of (19) with respect to is

p~1n - L a¯ p~1n - 1 - 2Y
p~1n - L a¯ 1 - = 2Y

L - p~1n + p~1n - c¯ hn p~1n - L + p~1n - c¯ hn

Because p~1n exceeds both c¯ and L, this is positive.
Proof of Proposition 4. At the proposed equilibrium, consumers expect high quality at p1n, so the quantity demanded is F n 1 - p1n/Y . Proposition 2 then implies that altruistic firms provide high-quality goods at this price. Because altruistic firms provide high-quality goods, incumbent firms that provide low-quality new goods do indeed lose 0 in Period 2. Thus, if (21) and (23) are satisfied at this price­quantity combination, selfish firms produce highquality goods as well because they prefer this to producing a low-quality good and to producing no new good at all. There is thus an equilibrium where consumers expect high quality and both types of firms supply it.

Proof of Proposition 5. Given an expectation that selfish firms will not produce the new good, altruistic firms produce high-quality goods since (10) and (11) are satisfied. This implies that firms who deviate from the equilibrium and sell a new good of low quality would indeed lose 0 in the second period. The failure of (23) and the definition of p^1n implies that selfish firms are strictly worse off if they deviate in this way.

Proof of Proposition 6. For clarity, I neglect most

superscripts and subscripts of W , a, and p in this proof.

Using (26), the cost c that leads firms who care equally for

all their customers to obtain a particular welfare level W

satisfies

c = mY - 2 2 - a mY W /hn

(42)

Using (42) to substitute for c in (28), one obtains

Wx X

=

2

- 2

a

W

-

a

2-a

mhn 4Y

Y

-X

2

a Y -X + 2Y

2 2 - a mhnY W

The derivative of this welfare with respect to m is then

dW x X

a 2 - a hn Y - X 2 a Y - X 2 2 - a hnW

dm = -

4Y

+4

mY

Rotemberg: Expected Firm Altruism, Quality Provision, and Brand Extensions

Marketing Science 32(2), pp. 325­341, © 2013 INFORMS

341

When marginal cost is given by (42), the smallest possible value of X (namely, -) is

2Y W - = Y - 2 - a mhn

Given this relationship, it turns out to be convenient to

write X as

X=Y - 1-

2Y W 2 - a mhn

so that X equals - when is 0, whereas it is strictly greater than - when > 0. Note that is at most equal to 1 if the firm feels any altruism at all. Using this value of X in the derivative above yields

dW x X aW 1 - dm = 2m

which is positive for all between 0 and 1.

Proof of Proposition 7. Let

i o



W1i

mH

mH

p1i mH

mH

- W1i mL mL pLi

(43)

i c



W1i

mH

mH

p1i mH

mH

- W1i mL mH p1i mH mH

(44)

The function W1b mL mH p is quadratic in p and reaches

its maximum at p1b mL mH . According to (34), p1b mL mH >

p1b mH mH > pLb , so that W1b mL mH p1b mH mH >

W1b mL mH pLb . In addition, the fact that the right-hand

side of (35) is positive implies that W1b mL mH pLb >

W1b mL mL pLb . Therefore,

b o

>

b c

.

This

means

that,

at

the

price pHb = p1b mH mH , condition (38) is more stringent than

condition (37) for firms of type b. Because the left-hand side

of (37) reaches a maximum at this price, any other price

makes condition (37) harder to meet. Therefore, if (37) is

violated at this price for firms of type b, there is no price

that leads these firms to supply quality mH .

In the case of firms of type x, p1x mL mH = p1x mH mH . Nonetheless, the fact that (36) implies that W1x is strictly increasing in me also implies, through the envelope

theorem, that W1x mL mH p1x mH mH > W1i mL mL pLi .

Therefore,

x o

>

x c

.

This

implies

that

condition

(38)

is

more

stringent than condition (37) for firms of type x when the

price pHx equals p1x mH mH . As a result, firms of type x are willing to supply quality mH at the price p1x mH mH if (38) is satisfied at this price.

The expressions for W1b and W1x in (33) and (36), respectively, are linear in m with coefficients that depend only

on a¯, Y , X, hn, and p1i /mH . Therefore,

i c

equals

the

deriva-

tive of W1i with respect to m times mH - mL . More-

over, the coefficient on m is larger in the case of W1b as

long as p1b mH mH /mH < X. For X  -, p1b mH mH 

p1x mH mH  mH X. Therefore,

b c



x c

,

which

in

turn

implies that

b o

>

x c

.

Now consider the equation system

b
o+

W2b mH cH - W2b mL cL

H

L

=-

x
c+

W2x mH cH X - W2x mL cL X

H

L

=-

The solution , H - L  of this system satisfies  > 0,

H - L  > 0 as long as

b o

>

x c

and

W2x mH

cH

X

-

W2x mL cL X > 0 > W2b mH cH - W2b mL cL . The former

is demonstrated above, and the latter is implied by (32).

Therefore, >  and H - L = H - L  lead to (38)

being satisfied for firms of type x at a price of p1x mH mH ,

whereas (37) is not satisfied for firms of type b at a price of

p1b mH mH .

References
Aaker DA, Keller KL (1990) Consumer evaluations of brand extensions. J. Marketing 54:27­41.
Abrahams J (2004) The Mission Statement Book: 301 Corporate Mission Statements from America's Top Companies (Ten Speed Press, New York).
Associated Press (1997) Gun maker Smith & Wesson now selling bicycles to police. (December 29) http://tinyurl.com/akzaijh.
Bagwell K, Riordan MH (1991) High and declining prices signal product quality. Amer. Econom. Rev. 81:224­239.
Broniarczyk SM, Alba JW (1994) The importance of the brand in brand extension. J. Marketing 21:214­228.
Business Wire (2003) Smith & Wesson bicycles receive wide acclaim. (April 16) http://tinyurl.com/b8z6d6l.
Cabral LMB (2000) Stretching firm and brand reputation. RAND J. Econom. 31:658­673.
Choi JP (1998) Brand extension as informational leverage. Rev. Econom. Stud. 65:655­669.
Fournier S (1998) Consumers and their brands: Developing relationship theory in consumer research. J. Consumer Res. 24:343­373.
Haig M (2011) Brand Failures: The Truth About the 100 Biggest Branding Mistakes of All Time (Kogan Page, London).
Isaacson W (2011) Steve Jobs (Simon & Schuster, New York). Judd KL, Riordan MH (1994) Price and quality in a product
monopoly. Rev. Econom. Stud. 61:773­789. Keller KL (1998) Strategic Brand Management (Prentice-Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ). Krebs D (1975) Empathy and altruism. J. Personality Soc. Psych.
32:1134­1146. Miklós-Thal J (2012) Linking reputations through umbrella brand-
ing. Quant. Marketing Econom. 10:335­374. Milberg SJ, Park CW, McCarthy MS (1997) Managing negative feed-
back effects associated with brand extensions: The impact of alternative branding strategies. J. Consumer Psych. 6:119­140. Ohbuchi K-I, T. Tamura, Quigley BM, Tedeschi JT, Madi M, Bind M, Mummendey A (2004) Anger, blame, and dimensions of perceived norm violations: Culture, gender, and relationships. J. Appl. Soc. Psych. 34:1587­1603. Roedder-John D, Loken B, Joiner C (1998) The negative impact of extensions: Can flagship products be diluted? J. Marketing 62:19­32. Rotemberg JJ (2008) Minimally acceptable altruism and the ultimatum game. J. Econom. Behav. Organ. 66:457­476. Rotemberg JJ (2011) Fair pricing. J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 9:952­981. Swaminathan V, Fox RJ, Reddy SK (2001) The impact of brand extension introduction on choice. J. Marketing 65:1­15. Tyler T (1999) Why people cooperate with organizations: An identity-based perspective. Sutton RI, Staw BM, eds. Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 21 (JAI Press, Greenwich, CT), 201­246. Wernerfelt B (1988) Umbrella branding as a signal of new product quality: An example of signaling by posting a bond. RAND J. Econom. 19:458­466.

