CELEBRATING 30 YEARS
Vol. 30, No. 4, July­August 2011, pp. 604­611 issn 0732-2399 eissn 1526-548X 11 3004 0604

doi 10.1287/mksc.1100.0612 © 2011 INFORMS

Practice Prize Paper
Marketing's Profit Impact: Quantifying Online and Off-line Funnel Progression

Thorsten Wiesel
Department of Marketing, Faculty of Economics and Business, University of Groningen, 9700 AV Groningen, The Netherlands, wiesel@wiesel.info
Koen Pauwels
Özyeg in University, 34662 Altunizade Üsküdar, Istanbul, Turkey, koen.pauwels@ozyegin.edu.tr
Joep Arts
Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, VU University Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands, jarts@feweb.vu.nl
Inofec, a small- to medium-sized enterprise in the business-to-business sector, desired a more analytic approach to allocate marketing resources across communication activities and channels. We developed a conceptual framework and econometric model to empirically investigate (1) the marketing communication effects on offline and online purchase funnel metrics and (2) the magnitude and timing of the profit impact of firm-initiated and customer-initiated contacts. We find evidence of many cross-channel effects, in particular, off-line marketing effects on online funnel metrics and online funnel metrics on off-line purchases. Moreover, marketing communication activities directly affect both early and later purchase funnel stages (website visits, online and off-line information, and quote requests). Finally, we find that online customer-initiated contacts have substantially higher profit impact than off-line firm-initiated contacts. Shifting marketing budgets toward these activities in a field experiment yielded net profit increases 14 times larger than those for the status quo allocation.
Key words: profit impact of marketing activities; off-line and online; persistence modeling; field experiment History: Received: March 28, 2010; accepted: July 30, 2010; Russell Winer served as the Practice Papers Section
editor-in-chief for this article. Published online in Articles in Advance December 30, 2010.

Analytical marketing is not very common in small and medium size enterprises in the business-to-business sector. As such, if we had a model or decision support system to enable us to decide how to allocate resources across communication activities and channels, we will have a huge advantage compared to our competitors. (Leon Suijkerbuijk, personal communication)
1. Introduction
The above quote by the CEO of Inofec BV (our partner firm) illustrates a typical challenge facing firms: at a time of product commoditization, business processes are among the last remaining points of differentiation (e.g., Davenport 2006). Allocating firm resources across channels and communication activities becomes an important question (Neslin et al. 2006, Neslin and Shankar 2009). Analytical marketing can assist firms in making sound decisions about their marketing resource allocation. It is based on the idea that marketing decisions can be supported with analytical mathematical models as opposed to purely based on judgment and experience (Wierenga 2008).

The specific focus of this study is on Inofec BV, a family-run European office furniture supplier with about 80 employees. It offers an array of more than 7,000 stock-keeping units to professional end users. The current CEO, Leon, sees the economic situation not as a threat, but rather as an opportunity to gain more insights from analyzing Inofec's own financial and marketing data. Until this point, longterm effects or cross-effects between channels were not considered, and allocation decisions were mainly based on gut feeling or "that's how we did it the last time." Against this background, Leon was looking for another perspective and was willing to adopt a marketing science approach to answer the following specific questions: (1) Do Inofec's marketing communication activities only "feed the funnel," or do they also have an effect on later stages of the purchase funnel? (2) What is the (net) profit effect of their marketing communication activities? Especially, what is the effect of "customer-initiated contacts" versus "firm-initiated contacts"? (3) When does the effect

604

Wiesel, Pauwels, and Arts: Marketing's Profit Impact: Quantifying Online and Off-line Funnel Progression

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 604­611, © 2011 INFORMS

605

"hit in," and how long does it last? (4) How can Inofec improve its profits by reallocating budgets?
Answering these questions leads to an improved understanding of the role of marketing communication activities and planning of appropriate strategic actions as well as contributes in four ways to existing literature. First, we investigate the role of each channel at different stages in the purchase funnel, which is of particular interest to companies and academics (Naik and Peters 2009, Frambach et al. 2007, Gensler et al. 2010). Second, we consider dynamic effects as well as feedback effects within a channel and across channels. Not doing so might bias recommendations because differences between performance and marketing spending levels may be due to a host of other factors and/or overlook the total net profit impact of marketing activity. Third, we investigate the marketing effectiveness in a business-tobusiness setting. Most previous research on allocating firm resources has focused on frequently purchased consumer goods (e.g., Biyalogorsky and Naik 2003, Deleersnyder et al. 2002). Finally, we make specific allocation recommendations for new marketing activities such as customer-initiated contacts (e.g., paid search advertising) and compare them with those of traditional firm-initiated contacts.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we provide the research framework for answering Inofec's management problem. In §3, we describe the data; §4 contains our modeling approach, and §5 discusses our empirical findings. In §6, we describe our recommendation to Inofec to reallocate the marketing budget and the design and results of our field experiment. Next, we discuss the impact of our project. Finally, §8 comments on the transferability of our approach to other settings and concludes our paper. More details about our methodology, results, and collaboration process are provided in the electronic companion to this paper, available as part of the online version that can be found at http://mktsci.pubs.informs.org/.
2. Research Framework
Our conceptual framework (see Figure 1) focuses on the effect of marketing communication activity on firm profit in a durable and business-to-business context, accounting for dynamic effects among purchase funnel stages in both off-line and online channels, and feedback effects within and across channels. Subsequently, we focus on three key aspects of this framework: (1) marketing activities, (2) channels and purchase stages, and (3) how they are affected by marketing activities.

2.1. Marketing Activity: Firm-Initiated Contacts and Customer-Initiated Contacts
Depicted as level 1 in Figure 1, firms posit a toolbox of different direct marketing communication activities in order to generate revenue and move customers through the purchase funnel. Generally speaking, we distinguish firm-initiated contacts (FICs) from customer-initiated contacts (CICs). Traditionally, marketing communication activities have focused on pushing messages on to consumers (Shankar and Malthouse 2007). However, these FICs (defined as any contact with a customer that is initiated by the firm) are increasingly unwanted (e.g., Blattberg et al. 2008). In addition, unsolicited campaigns such as faxes or e-mails are progressively outlawed in many countries. In contrast to FICs, CICs are defined as any contact with a firm that is initiated by a customer or prospective customer (e.g., Bowman and Narayandas 2001). The Internet has empowered consumers to interact with companies on their own terms. Although the effectiveness of FICs might be diminishing, CICs show a lot of potential and have become a significant component of firms' marketing campaigns (e.g., Ghose and Yang 2009). Response rates for CICs are projected to be about 15 times higher than traditional FICs (Sarner and Herschel 2008) because they are based on customers' own queries and are hence considered far less intrusive (Shankar and Malthouse 2007). Taken together, the elasticity of CICs such as paid search advertising should be substantially higher than those of FICs. In our conceptual framework, the activities are as follows: e-mail campaigns, catalog mailing, and flyer and fax campaigns represent the traditional marketing communication activities focusing on pushing messages at consumers (FICs), whereas Google's AdWords represents the customer-initiated contacts. We augment these activities by discounts given to customers to control for price effects.
2.2. Channels and Purchase Funnel Stages Depicted as level 2 in Figure 1, customers' channel preferences are likely to differ across alternative use situations, including the closeness of the customer to the purchase decision (e.g., Alba et al. 1997). The central idea of the "purchase funnel" is that customers move toward a purchase in a series of stages, including a cognitive (e.g., need recognition and information search), an affective (e.g., evaluation of alternatives), and, ultimately, a conative (purchase) stage. Although the implied hierarchy has been questioned for hedonic and low-involvement products (e.g., Vakratsas and Ambler 1999), Inofec believed it was a useful starting point in the office furniture business. Currently, customers tend not to stay in one channel when moving through the funnel but switch between channels--cross-channel effects

Wiesel, Pauwels, and Arts: Marketing's Profit Impact: Quantifying Online and Off-line Funnel Progression

606

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 604­611, © 2011 INFORMS

Figure 1 Conceptual Framework

Feedback

Feedback

Benefits

Online channel

Feedback

Web visits Leads (info requests) Quote requests Orders

Marketing activity

Catalog Fax Flyer

AdWords E-mail

Costs

Level 1 Feedback
Benefits Off-line channel

Level 2

Cross-channel effect

Leads (info requests) Quote requests Orders

Feedback

Financial results

Profits

Financial results Level 3

(e.g., Ahuja et al. 2003). Moreover, various feedback effects between stages, channels, and activities may exist (e.g., Ilfeld and Winer 2002). In our conceptual framework, the stages are as follows. For the online funnel, Web visits and leads (information requests) signal the beginning of the thought process (cognitive stage). Request for quotes (via the website) indicates that the prospective customer is evaluating the offer (affective stage). Finally, orders (via the website) is a straightforward variable representing the conative stage. For the off-line funnel, the variables are similar except that we do not observe an equivalent measure to Web visits.
2.3. Marketing Effects on Purchase Funnel Stages Both online and off-line marketing activity may ultimately generate profits (level 3 in Figure 1) by inducing prospective customers to start and finish their purchase process either online or off-line. As for marketing effects on different stages of the purchase funnel, prior research offers two different perspectives. First, impersonal marketing communication activities may simply "feed the funnel," i.e., bring in prospective customers. In contrast, the second perspective posits that marketing communication activity effects may linger in the customer's mind and have a direct effect on later stages in the purchase funnel (e.g., Fulgoni and Mörn 2009). For instance, a "billboard" effect of paid search advertising (i.e., exposure to paid advertising increases the user's familiarity with the brand or firm name) might lead to more quotes

or purchases for a highly exposed supplier. In addition, an "inferred quality" effect may exist: high levels of marketing communications may serve as a signal for unobservable product or service quality (e.g., Vakratsas and Ambler 1999). In our framework, we account for both: marketing activities affect the beginning but also later stages of the purchase funnel.
3. Data
Inofec sells office furniture products mostly to business customers. We use daily data from Inofec spanning January 2007­May 2009 as the model estimation period (and June­August 2009 as the experimental period) comprising four databases (i.e., transaction, marketing, online and off-line activities). The analysis is at the daily level because marketing actions vary daily, and we aim to distinguish the (cross) effects within the purchase funnel, which may occur within days. Our data cover 876 days (more than 2 and 1/2 years) and more than 12,000 customers for marketing activities and purchase funnel metrics across online and off-line channels, making it uniquely suited to address Inofec's management problem. Table 1 displays the variable operationalization.
We operationalized sales as revenues because unit sales are not informative as a result of vastly different prices (from E5.50 for a pencil-holder to more than E9,000 for a customized solution). Gross profits (i.e., profits before marketing) are the customer-individual revenues per order minus the customer-individual costs of goods sold (COGS) per order, aggregated

Wiesel, Pauwels, and Arts: Marketing's Profit Impact: Quantifying Online and Off-line Funnel Progression

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 604­611, © 2011 INFORMS

607

Table 1 Variable Operationalization

Variable

Operationalization

Marketing activity
Online funnel
Off-line funnel
Performance

Catalog
Fax
Flyers
AdWords e-mail
Discounts Web visits Online leads
Online quotes
Online orders
Off-line leads
Off-line quotes
Off-line orders
Sales revenues Gross profit

Daily cost of catalogs (0 on days with no catalogs sent)
Daily cost of faxes (0 on days with no faxes sent)
Daily cost of flyers (0 on days with no flyers sent)
Daily costs of pay-per-click referrals Daily number of net e-mails (sent minus
bounced back) Percentage of revenue given as a discount
Daily total amount of visits to the website Daily requests for information received
via the website Daily requests for offers received via the
website Daily number of orders received via the
website Daily requests for information received
via sales reps, telephone, or mail Daily requests for offers received via
sales reps, telephone, or mail Daily number of orders received via
sales reps, telephone, or mail Daily sales revenues Daily revenues minus cost of goods sold

across customers for each day. Our rationale for aggregating rather than considering customer-specific orders are as follows. First, Inofec's business is such that it requires an instream of new customers, for which customer-specific information is not readily available. Likewise, customer-specific data on Google AdWords click-through and early funnel metrics are not available. Finally, Inofec wanted to focus on aggregate profit effects first to make overall reallocations among marketing budgets, themselves readily available only at the aggregate level. Table 2 displays

Table 2

Descriptive Statistics for the Variables Used in the Analysis (per Day)

Variable

Mean

Median

Std. dev.

Catalog (E) Fax (E) Flyers (E) AdWords (E) E-mail (number of) Discounts (%) Web visits (number of) Online leads (number of) Online quotes (number of) Online orders (number of) Off-line leads (number of) Off-line quotes (number of) Off-line orders (number of) Sales revenues (E) Gross profit (E)

158 77 51 98 828 03 148 84 350
6 88 584 24
3 35 0 97 13 06 1 59 2 52 38 12 30 063 00 13 778 31

0 0 0 151 89 0 7 00 578 00 3 00 0 11 00 0 2 00 41 00 29 277 00 13 894 52

1 447 03 429 44
2 901 11 28 87
1 784 22 5 55
277 33 2 50 1 45
12 25 2 64 2 68
29 89 28 856 78 12 332 23

the mean, median, and standard deviation of the variables.
Among the marketing communication activities with cost information, flyers represent 70% of the total marketing cost, followed by catalogs (13%), Google AdWords (13%), and finally faxes (4%). These marketing activities amount to 6%, 1%, 1%, and 0.4%, respectively, of gross profits. The funnel metrics show that the online channel is more popular for information requests (online leads are higher than off-line leads) but that the off-line channel is more popular for quote requests and orders. In addition, the average off-line order (E286) is slightly higher than the average online order (E235). Finally, gross profits represent 46% of sales revenues.

4. Methodology
We address the challenges of "click attribution" (i.e., customer click-through may be driven by off-line marketing spending) as well as cross-channel, direct, and feedback effects by extending the persistence modeling approach (Dekimpe and Hanssens 1999). We incorporate the five steps outlined in Table 3.
First, we determine which variables should be included in the model as endogenous, because they are Granger-caused by the other variables. Second, unit root and cointegration test tests reveal in what form the endogenous variables enter the model. Based on the first two steps, we can specify and estimate a dynamic system model of the dynamic interactions among endogenous variables. We estimate a vectorautoregressive (VAR) model including both online (Google AdWords, e-mail) and off-line (fax, flyer, catalog, and discounts) marketing, online purchase funnel metrics (Web visits, online leads, quote requests, and orders), off-line purchase funnel metrics (off-line leads, quote requests, and orders), and profits (revenues-- costs of goods sold). All variables are endogenous, and hence we capture direct, indirect, and feedback effects of marketing communication activities on funnel stages. As control variables, we include an intercept C, a time trend T , day-of-week seasonal dummies (using Friday as the benchmark), and dummies for holidays. Equation (1) presents this model in matrix form, and the electronic companion displays all 14 equations in the model:

p
Yt = A +
i=1

iYt-i +

Xt + t

t=1 2

T (1)

where A is a 14 × 1 vector of intercepts, Yt is the 14 × 1 vector of the endogenous variables, and Xt the vector of exogenous control variables listed above,
and t is the 14 × 1 matrix of residuals. Although this model yields unit profit effects of key interest to
Inofec, we also want to compare the sales elasticities

Wiesel, Pauwels, and Arts: Marketing's Profit Impact: Quantifying Online and Off-line Funnel Progression

608

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 604­611, © 2011 INFORMS

Table 3 Overview of Methodological Steps

Methodological step

Relevant literature

1. Granger causality tests
2. Unit root and cointegration tests Augmented Dickey­Fuller Test Zivot­Andrews test Cointegration analysis
3. Model of dynamic interactions Vector autoregressive model VAR in differences Vector error correction model
4. Policy simulation analysis Unrestricted impulse response Cumulative marketing elasticity Restricted policy simulation

Granger (1969) Trusov et al. (2009)
Enders (2004) Zivot and Andrews (1992) Johansen et al. (2000)
Dekimpe and Hanssens (1999) Bronnenberg et al. (2000) Pauwels et al. (2007)
Pesaran and Shin (1998) Pauwels et al. (2002) Pauwels (2004)

5. Validation analysis VAR lag specification Regression analysis Field experiment

Ventzislav and Lutz (2005) This paper This paper

Research question
Which variables are temporally causing which other variables?
Are variables stationary or evolving? Are unit root results robust to unknown breaks? Are evolving variables in long-run equilibrium?
How do performance and marketing interact in the long run and short run, accounting for the unit root and cointegration results?
What is the net dynamic impact of a marketing change on performance?
What is the direct dynamic impact of a marketing change, controlling for its indirect effects?
Are the results robust to the lag selection criterion? Do the key results replicate in regression analysis? Do the key results hold for a major policy change?

with previous research. To this end, we estimate a second VAR model, replacing profits with sales revenues. Elasticities are calculated from these unit effects (e.g., Trusov et al. 2009); we find for both models that the linear specification outperforms the log­log specification (similar to the findings for the daily data in Rutz and Bucklin 2011). The fourth step quantifies the effect of a change to marketing on performance, and the fifth step verifies that these effect estimates hold up, for example, in a field experiment. Moreover, we adapt restricted impulse response function analysis (Pauwels 2004) to separate the indirect effects of marketing activities (e.g., Google AdWords increase online quote requests, which in turn increases online orders) from direct effects (e.g., Google AdWords directly increases online orders). In the fifth step (detailed in the electronic companion), we validate our findings.
5. Key Results
Based on Granger causality tests (Granger 1969), unit root tests, and diagnostic tests for descriptive models (Franses 2005), we estimated both VAR models with all variables in levels (as depicted in Equation (1)) and one lag (as suggested by all four information criteria).1 The models explain 77% of the variation in profits (adjusted R2 = 0 76) and 78% (adjusted R2 = 0 78) in revenues.
Based on the VAR estimates, we calculate the impulse response of performance to a one-unit change
1 Please see the electronic companion for the results on the effect timing of marketing activity, effect on purchase funnel stages, and the validation.

in the marketing variable, and we display both the long-term profit (unit) effect and its sales (revenues) elasticity in the first two columns of Table 4. Catalog had no significant effect and is therefore omitted. Flyers, the activity that consumes 70% of the marketing budget, brings in less money than it generates. This finding contrast with that of faxes and of e-mail, whose profit impact of E0.71 each is less than what the company estimates it spends per e-mail. Interestingly, the sales elasticities of these three marketing actions are consistent with that of off-line advertising reported in meta-analyses of approximately 0.05­0.10 (e.g., Tellis 2009).
In contrast, Google AdWords is estimated to yield E55.72 for each Euro spent. This estimate is 17 times higher than the estimated profit effect of faxes, the most effective off-line activity. This difference resembles the projected 15 times higher response rates of CICs versus FICs (Sarner and Herschel 2008). The sales elasticity of Google AdWords is 4.35, a lot higher than that of FIC elasticities reported in literature but similar to that of distribution (e.g., 2.42 in Srinivasan

Table 4

Marketing's Total Profit Effect, Sales Elasticity, and Its Timing in Days

Variable

Profit effect Sales elasticity Wear-in Wear-out 90% effect

Fax (E)

3 33

0 05

0

6

4

Flyers (E)

0 57

0 04

2

9

5

AdWords (E) 55 72

4 35

1

9

7

E-mail (each)

0 71

0 12

2

5

5

Discount (1%) 789

0 75

0

2

1

Notes. As in previously published VAR applications, we only accumulate the significant impulse response coefficients to arrive at the total, over time, profit impact. If none of the impulse response coefficients is significantly different from zero, the reported total effect is zero.

Wiesel, Pauwels, and Arts: Marketing's Profit Impact: Quantifying Online and Off-line Funnel Progression

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 604­611, © 2011 INFORMS

609

et al. 2010). We checked for the possibility that the AdWords effect might be related to the relatively low spending by (1) examining nonlinear effects (but did not find such evidence) and (2) experimenting with substantially increasing AdWords (see §6).
Our results for the effect on purchase funnel stages (for details, please see the electronic companion) shows that it is unwise to credit a marketing activity only for orders in "its" channel, a practice typical for companies with different managers for different channels. This approach would be especially off for Google AdWords, which obtains 73% of its total profit impact from off-line orders. In contrast, faxes and flyers obtain only 6% and 20%, respectively, of their profit impact from the "other" (i.e., online) channel.
6. Recommendations to the Firm and Field Experiment
The results of our analysis enable the company to plan appropriate strategic activities. Together with Inofec, we derived the following recommendations for Inofec's marketing strategy:2 (1) decrease spending on flyers and (2) increase spending on AdWords. To gain further insights with respect to model-free evidence, we conducted a 2 × 2 field experiment running for three months (June­August 2009) with a base (no changes in the planned flyer campaigns) and low condition for flyer spending (cutting flyer spending by half) and a base and high condition for AdWords spending (doubling AdWords spending).3 Any marketing activities other than flyers and AdWords were held constant during our experiment.
Recognizing that unobserved and uncontrollable factors might drive gross profit changes in the experimental period, Inofec agreed to a variation of difference-in-differences procedure4 Next, we
2 Two more recommendations are to increase spending on faxes and e-mail campaigns. The first proved impractical because of new legal restrictions forbidding unsolicited fax campaigns introduced in the Netherlands (October 1, 2009). Moreover, Inofec considered it safe to increase e-mail campaigns because of our discussions and their own experience. While the frequency was not that high in the past, Inofec now sends a weekly e-mail to existing customers as well as people who have asked for information before or subscribed for receiving e-mails.
3 We built four experimental groups based on regions in Inofec's home market (the Netherlands) for which we could vary both flyers and Google AdWords spending. These groups are comparable in terms of total customer spent (mean, E1099.26; std. dev., 105.39), recency (mean, 247.18; std. dev., 3.24), frequency (mean, 2.73; std. dev., 0.32), monetary value (mean, E324.30; std. dev., 15.45), and number of existing (mean, 993; std. dev., 26) and new customers.
4 For each condition, we subtract the gross profits in the three months preceding the experiment from gross profits in the three months of the experiment, and we then scale each condition's profit change by the national average profit change (to control for seasonal and general economy factors that may boost or depress profits in all conditions).

Table 5 Flyers

Net Profit Changes

AdWords

High

Base

Base

81 39

E10 84

Low E153 71 E135 45

Table 6 Flyers

Long-Term AdWords and Flyer Effect Estimates for Each Experimental Group

AdWords

High

Base

Base

AdWords

59 30

50 23

Flyer

0 57

0 34

Low

AdWords

63 42

52 31

Flyer

0 61

0 92

accounted for the difference in spending.5 Table 5 shows the net profit changes. The average higher spending of E17.66 per day is more than offset by the higher profit changes--in either Flyer condition. Further, the average daily Flyer savings of E137 a day is substantially higher than the decrease in profits before marketing cost, consistent with our analysis.
Summing up, the field experiment supports our assertions. Reallocating firm's budget toward online activities yields a substantial increase in profit after marketing costs. This profit increase stems from two sources: increased sales through higher spending on AdWords (gross profit increase > spending increase) and cost savings through lower spending on flyers (cost savings > lost gross profit). To test whether the magnitude of our estimates would still hold up after such as substantial policy change, we reestimated our model (with the exception of catalogs, which were not sent during the experiment) on the 91 days of data during the experiment, and we display the results in Table 6 for AdWords and flyers. We find that the longterm marketing effects for each experimental group are in the same order of magnitude as those reported before the experiment.
7. Organizational Impact
Our work has significant organizational impact6 along several dimensions.
5 We divided the increase or decrease in spending over the total experimental period by the number of days of that period (91 days). Total AdWords spending increased by E1,607, which makes an average daily increase in AdWords spending of E17.66. Total flyer spending decreased by E12,462, which makes an average daily decrease in spending of E137. 6 For more details on the organizational impact, please see the electronic companion.

Wiesel, Pauwels, and Arts: Marketing's Profit Impact: Quantifying Online and Off-line Funnel Progression

610

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 604­611, © 2011 INFORMS

Cultural Impact. Inofec has been managed by intuition for many years. Hence, it is very unlikely to totally abandon the "gut feeling." Given the complexity of marketing problems, a combination of marketing analytics and managerial intuition provides the best results for many marketing decisions (Lilien and Rangaswamy 2008). Accordingly, Inofec now uses both scientific approaches as well as intuition to make their decisions. Moreover, our work is a basis for discussing the operational dimensions of Inofec's marketing activities, affecting the mental models of decision makers throughout the organization (Kayande et al. 2009). We developed a spreadsheet-driven dashboard tool--including a rolling windows approach to update the model estimates--that allows easy entry of potential marketing allocation plans and then uses the model estimates to project likely profit consequences (Pauwels et al. 2009). Finally, the ongoing training and increasing clout of the new employee, responsible for marketing analytics, is expected to help institutionalize the marketing scientific approach to allocating marketing resources--the final step in model adoption according to Davenport (2009).
Strategic Impact. Our work enables Inofec to determine the activities in which the company was generating or losing money and plan appropriate strategic activities. This improved understanding of the role of marketing communication activities has led to a strategic change in their focus of activities, as noted by Leon in a personal communication: "The power and effectiveness of our website and AdWords were surprising. Based on that, we have an increasing interest in investing in online activities." Our decomposition of marketing's profit impact helps the company better understand how profit changes are driven by changes in its marketing mix. This has led Inofec to rethink its strategies. As Leon says, "We are going to design way more elaborate marketing strategies. In doing so, we will focus on the linkages between online and off-line activities, explicitly distinguish the effects, and explore new opportunities due to new technical developments" (personal communication).
8. Conclusion
In conclusion, our project served as a turning point for Inofec to abandon pure gut feeling and to use instead marketing science in order to gain competitive advantage and increase profit.7 The approach's strategic, financial, operational, and cultural impacts have been significant. Our field experiment helped us and the firm testing the implementation and robustness of
7 For more details on the transferability, please see the electronic companion.

our recommendations. Although the specific focus of this paper is on Inofec BV, the need for accountability and practical marketing science tools to allocate one's marketing communication budget across media and online and off-line channels is not limited to our partner firm. As such, our journey with Inofec included several insights we believe are valuable across various settings. The present study's insights on substantial cross-channel effects and direct marketing impact on later funnel stages are likely to transfer to other situations where managers aim to quantify long-term marketing effectiveness across channels. In addition, our analysis of indirect and direct marketing effects on purchase funnel metrics provides a rationale for the wear-in and wear-out of marketing effects on performance--a key managerial issue that has received little research attention. Our demonstration of the magnitude and direction of cross-channel effects may inspire other firms to perform their own analyses to overcome separate accountability for online and off-line marketing budgets and results. Finally, our methodology has been shown to apply across vastly different industries such as business-tobusiness and fast-moving consumer goods, durables, and business content sites. However, validating the results and recommendations in a field experiment is new and may inspire further testing of when the Lucas (1976) critique presents a substantial empirical challenge to the model's recommendations.
Limitations of our approach inspire future research: we did not have data on competitive spending. Although this is typical for direct marketing applications (e.g., Rutz and Bucklin 2011), and competitive reaction is unlikely to strongly affect marketing effectiveness (Pauwels 2004), modeling competitive effects would add to our understanding of fluctuations in Inofec's marketing effectiveness and performance. The absence of competitive data also meant that we could not determine relative-to-competition elasticities, which are key in formal optimization models (Gupta and Steenburgh 2008). Moreover, although we did conduct a field experiment to validate the direction of our recommendations, we did not have the opportunity to optimize marketing spending given the very high estimated elasticity of AdWords. Evidently, increasing AdWords must eventually yield diminishing returns, which we did not find in our data. Continued experimentation will help us discover the upper and lower bounds on different mix variables. In doing so, one can also test when to spend on which activity (i.e., media pulsation) to further improve marketing effectiveness.
9. Electronic Companion
An electronic companion to this paper is available as part of the online version that can be found at http:// mktsci.pubs.informs.org/.

Wiesel, Pauwels, and Arts: Marketing's Profit Impact: Quantifying Online and Off-line Funnel Progression

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 604­611, © 2011 INFORMS

611

Acknowledgments The authors are listed in reverse alphabetical order and are thankful for comments and suggestions provided by Sonja Gensler, Mike Hanssens, Peter Leeflang, Martin Natter, Scott Neslin, Gerry Tellis, Peter Verhoef, the Institute of the Study of Business Markets at Penn State, seminar participants at the University of Groningen and University of Kiel, as well as participants at the EMAC 2009 and Marketing Dynamics Conference 2009. Special thanks to Inofec BV and especially to Sandra de Rooij and Leon Suijkerbuijk.
References
Ahuja, M., B. Gupta, P. Raman. 2003. An empirical investigation of online consumer purchasing behavior. Comm. ACM 46(12) 145­151.
Alba, J., J. Lynch, B. Weitz, C. Janiszewski, R. Lutz, A. Sawyer, S. Wood. 1997. Interactive home shopping: Consumer, retailer, and manufacturer incentive to participate in electronic marketplaces. J. Marketing 61(3) 38­53.
Biyalogorsky, E., P. Naik. 2003. Clicks and mortar: The effect of online activities on off-line sales. Marketing Lett. 14(1) 21­32.
Blattberg, R. C., B.-D. Kim, S. A. Neslin. 2008. Database Marketing: Analyzing and Managing Customers. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany.
Bowman, D., D. Narayandas. 2001. Managing customer-initiated contacts with manufacturers: The impact on share of category requirements and word-of-mouth behavior. J. Marketing Res. 38(3) 281­297.
Bronnenberg, B. J., V. Mahajan, W. R. Vanhonacker. 2000. The emergence of market structure in new repeat-purchase categories: A dynamic approach and an empirical application. J. Marketing Res. 37(1) 16­31.
Davenport, T. 2006. Competing on analytics. Harvard Bus. Rev. (January) 1­12.
Davenport, T. 2009. Make better decisions. Harvard Bus. Rev. (November) 117­123.
Dekimpe, M. G., D. M. Hanssens. 1999. Sustained spending and persistent response: A new look at long-term marketing profitability. J. Marketing Res. 36(4) 397­412.
Deleersnyder, B., I. Geyskens, K. Gielens, M. G. Dekimpe. 2002. How cannibalistic is the Internet channel? A study of the newspaper industry in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. Internat. J. Res. Marketing 19(4) 337­348.
Enders, W. 2004. Applied Econometric Time Series. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Fulgoni, G. M., M. P. Mörn. 2009. Whither the click? How online advertising works. J. Advertising Res. 49(2) 134­142.
Frambach, R. T., H. C. A. Roest, T. V. Krishnan. 2007. The impact of consumer internet experience on channel preference and usage intentions across the different stages of the buying process. J. Interactive Marketing 21(2) 26­41.
Franses, P. H. 2005. On the use of econometric models for policy simulation in marketing. J. Marketing Res. 42(1) 1­14.
Gensler, S., M. Boehm, P. Verhoef. 2010. Modeling customers' channel choice across different stages of the buying process. Working paper, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
Ghose, A., S. Yang. 2009. An empirical analysis of search engine advertising: Sponsored search in electronic markets. Management Sci. 55(10) 1605­1622.
Gupta, S., T. Steenburgh. 2008. Allocating marketing resources. R. Kerin, R. O'Regan, eds. Marketing Mix Resource Allocation and Planning: New Perspectives and Practices. American Marketing Association, Chicago, 3­37.

Granger, C. W. J. 1969. Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-spectral methods. Econometrica 37(3) 424­438.
Ilfeld, J. S., R. S. Winer. 2002. Generating website traffic. J. Advertising Res. 42(5) 49­61.
Johansen, S., R. Mosconi, B. Nielsen. 2000. Cointegration analysis in the presence of structural breaks in the deterministic trend. Econometrics J. 3(2) 216­249.
Kayande, U., A. De Bruyn, G. L. Lilien, A. Rangaswamy, G. H. van Bruggen. 2009. How incorporating feedback mechanisms in a DSS affects DSS evaluations. Inform. Systems Res. 20(4) 527­546.
Lilien, G. L., A. Rangaswamy. 2008. Marketing engineering: Models that connect with practice. B. Wierenga, ed. Handbook of Marketing Decision Models. Springer Science Business Media, New York, 527­559.
Lucas, R. E., Jr. 1976. Econometric policy evaluation: A critique. Carnegie-Rochester Conf. Public Policy 1(1) 19­46.
Naik, P. A., K. Peters. 2009. A hierarchical marketing communications model of online and offline media synergies. J. Interactive Marketing 23(4) 288­299.
Neslin, S. A., V. Shankar. 2009. Key issues in multichannel customer management: Current knowledge and future directions. J. Interactive Marketing 23(1) 70­81.
Neslin, S. A., D. Grewal, R. Leghorn, V. Shankar, M. L. Teerling, J. S. Thomas, P. C. Verhoef. 2006. Challenges and opportunities in multichannel management. J. Service Res. 9(2) 95­112.
Pauwels, K. 2004. How dynamic consumer response, competitor response, company support and company inertia shape longterm marketing effectiveness. Marketing Sci. 23(4) 596­610.
Pauwels, K. H., D. M. Hanssens, S. Siddarth. 2002. The longterm effects of price promotions on category incidence, brand choice, and purchase quantity. J. Marketing Res. 39(4) 421­439.
Pauwels, K. H., S. Srinivasan, P. H. Franses. 2007. When do price thresholds matter in retail categories? Marketing Sci. 26(1) 83­100.
Pauwels, K. H., T. Ambler, B. H. Clark, P. LaPointe, D. Reibstein, B. Skiera, B. Wierenga, T. Wiesel. 2009. Dashboards as a service: Why, what, how, and what research is needed? J. Service Res. 12(2) 175­189.
Pesaran, H., Y. Shin. 1998. Generalized impulse response analysis in linear multivariate models. Econom. Lett. 58(1) 17­29.
Rutz, O., R. Bucklin. 2011. From generic to branded: A model of spillover dynamics in paid search advertising. J. Marketing Res. Forthcoming.
Sarner, A., G. Herschel. 2008. A Checklist for Evaluating an Inbound and Outbound Multichannel Campaign Management Application. Report G00160776, Gartner, Stamford, CT.
Shankar, V., E. C. Malthouse. 2007. The growth of interactions and dialogs in interactive marketing. J. Interactive Marketing 21(2) 2­4.
Srinivasan, S., M. Vanhuele, K. Pauwels. 2010. Mind-set metrics in market response models: An integrative approach. J. Marketing Res. 47(4) 672­684.
Tellis, G. J. 2009. Generalizations about ad effectiveness in markets. J. Advertising 49(2) 240­245.
Trusov, M., R. E. Bucklin, K. Pauwels. 2009. Effects of word-ofmouth versus traditional marketing: Findings for an Internet social networking site. J. Marketing 73(5) 90­102.
Vakratsas, D., T. Ambler. 1999. How advertising works: What do we really know? J. Marketing 63(1) 26­43.
Ventzislav, I., K. Lutz. 2005. A practitioner's guide to lag-order selection for VAR impulse response analysis. Stud. Nonlinear Dynamics Econometrics 9(1) Article 2.
Wierenga, B., ed. 2008. The past, the present and the future of marketing decision models: Introduction to the handbook. Handbook of Marketing Decision Models. Springer Science Business Media, New York, 3­20.
Zivot, E., D. W. K. Andrews. 1992. Further evidence on the great crash, the oil-price shock, and the unit-root hypothesis. J. Bus. Econom. Statist. 10(3) 251­270.

