CELEBRATING 30 YEARS
Vol. 30, No. 4, July­August 2011, pp. 666­685 issn 0732-2399 eissn 1526-548X 11 3004 0666

doi 10.1287/mksc.1110.0651 © 2011 INFORMS

Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search
Dina Mayzlin, Jiwoong Shin
Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520 {dina.mayzlin@yale.edu, jiwoong.shin@yale.edu}
What the firm should say in an advertising message, the choice of content, is a critical managerial decision. Here, we focus on a particular aspect of the advertising content choice: an attribute-focused appeal versus an appeal with no direct information on product attributes. We make two assumptions that capture the reality of the advertising context. First, we assume that the bandwidth of advertising is limited: a firm can only communicate about a limited number of attributes. Second, we assume that consumers are active: they can choose to engage in a costly search to obtain additional product-related information. In this setting, we show that there exists an equilibrium where the high-quality firm chooses to produce messages devoid of any attribute information in order to invite the consumer to engage in search, which is likely to uncover positive information about the product. Whereas most of the previous literature has focused on the decision to advertise as a signal of quality, we show that message content, coupled with consumer search, can also serve as a credible signal of quality. In an extension, we show that our results are robust to endogenizing the firm's decision on the amount of advertising spending.
Key words: advertising; advertising content; attribute; nonattribute-focused advertising; uninformative advertising; quality signal; consumer search
History: Received: October 16, 2009; accepted: March 26, 2011; Eric Bradlow and then Preyas Desai served as the editor-in-chief and Yuxin Chen served as associate editor for this article.

1. Introduction
Many markets are characterized by imperfect consumer information--consumers are often poorly informed about the existence, price, and attributes of products. Because of this uncertainty, firms invest large amounts of resources into developing effective advertising campaigns to influence consumer learning. Given this, it is surprising to observe that in practice a large proportion of advertising contains no direct information on product attributes (Abernethy and Butler 1992 find that 37.5% of U.S. TV advertising has no product attribute cues). In this paper, we provide a novel explanation for the firm's decision to strategically withhold information on product attributes in its advertising.
In particular, we explain when a firm would choose to make vague claims (or no claims) as opposed to mention specific product attributes in its advertising. We will refer to a campaign that emphasizes product attributes as "attribute-focused" advertising. By definition, this type of advertising contains "hard" information (Tirole 1986) about product benefits, and hence, the claims are credible and verifiable. In contrast, we will refer to a campaign that does not emphasize any particular product attribute as ostensibly "uninformative" or "nonattribute-focused" advertising.1
1 Previous advertising literature uses the term "uninformative" advertising to designate advertising that has no direct information

As an example of attribute-focused advertising, consider the credit card issuer Capital One's "What's in Your Wallet?" campaign, which focuses on one specific attribute, such as the convenience of claiming rewards or the low interest rate. Other firms in the same industry pursue a different advertising strategy in that they convey no direct information about their credit cards' benefits. For example, the American Express's "My Life. My Card." campaign made no mention of the card's benefits such as its excellent rewards program.2 We will refer to this type of message as nonattribute-focused.3
How will these different types of advertising campaigns affect consumers' inference about product quality? What is the relationship between product
on product attributes (Milgrom and Roberts 1986, Bagwell and Ramey 1994, Bagwell 2007). Here, however, the term "uninformative" is confusing because in our model "uninformative" ads do convey information about quality to the consumer in equilibrium. Hence, we mostly use the term "nonattribute-focused" advertising to avoid confusion.
2 Since it started ranking credit cards in 2007, J.D. Power and Associates has consistently ranked American Express as number one in customer satisfaction (see J.D. Power and Associates 2010).
3 In practice, the discrete classification of all ads into "attributefocused" or "nonattribute-focused" is difficult. For example, some nonattribute-focused ads provide basic information about the product, whereas some attribute-focused ads focus on irrelevant or nondifferentiating attributes. Hence, the simple classification of "attribute-focused" or "uninformative" is an approximation of what is really a continuum.

666

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

667

quality and the firm's decision to make attributefocused claims? In particular, why do we sometimes observe high-quality brands choosing ads that make no mention of their product's attributes, as was the case for American Express during the duration of the "My Life. My Card." campaign? One may think that the high-quality firm would choose to emphasize the its product's benefits that are, by definition, strong. However, the limited bandwidth of communication inherent in any form of advertising implies that a firm can talk about only a small subset of its product's attributes. It is impossible for a firm to accurately communicate all of the features associated with its product in a 30-second commercial or a print ad (Shapiro 2006, Bhardwaj et al. 2008). Hence, if the firm claims to be good on a few selected attributes, its advertising will be indistinguishable from the advertising of the firm that is only good at those attributes. If, on the other hand, the firm makes no attributefocused claims, its advertising will be indistinguishable from the advertising of a firm that cannot deliver high quality on any attributes.
For example, consider the digital camera Canon PowerShot SD940 IS. This camera is high quality on a large number of attributes: the Canon website lists 18 technologies that were contained within the camera (consistent with this, in 2010, the camera was ranked second out of 55 in the subcompact digital camera category by ConsumerReports.org). Clearly, Canon cannot emphasize all of PowerShot's superior attributes in a 30-second commercial or a print ad. On the other hand, if Canon decides to focus on one of the PowerShot's attributes, such as the quality of its flash photos, it cannot distinguish itself from a camera such as Nikon Coolpix S3000, which happens to have highquality flash photos but is dominated by the PowerShot on the versatility dimension. If Canon instead chooses to emphasize the versatility dimension, then it cannot distinguish itself from Pentax Optio I-10, which is equally versatile but is dominated by the PowerShot on LCD quality.4
The argument above highlights the point that the firm may not be able to entirely resolve the uncertainty about its product through advertising alone under limited bandwidth in advertising communication. However, a consumer who is uncertain about the product's features following exposure to advertising may take actions to resolve this uncertainty (i.e., the consumer is "active"): she can conduct her own search to discover the product's quality prior to purchase by engaging in activities such as reading online product reviews or talking to her friends. Therefore, the highquality firm may actually prefer to withhold product
4 Our quality information is based on the ranking of digital cameras on ConsumerReports.org (accessed September 2010).

attribute information in its advertising (i.e., engage in nonattribute-focused advertising) in order to encourage the consumer to search because it is confident that the information uncovered will be positive. In contrast, an average firm that imitates this strategy risks losing its customer in cases when she uncovers negative information as part of her search. Hence, an average firm may choose to engage in an attribute-focused appeal, despite the fact that this perfectly reveals its type. Upon seeing a nonattribute-focused ad, the consumer may choose to search because she is unsure whether the advertiser is the high-type product, who says little because it has so much to say, or the lowtype product, who says little because it has nothing to say. Hence, nonattribute-focused advertising serves as an invitation to search.
In this paper, we formalize the above argument and analyze the firm's simultaneous price and advertising content decisions. We also endogenize the consumer's search behavior, which is again affected by the firm's price and advertising content. By taking into account the fact that consumers may choose to search for additional information after seeing its advertising, the high-quality firm may strategically withhold information on product attributes in its advertising message, and therefore, advertising content can signal product quality. In an extension we show that advertising content can signal quality even when the amount of advertising spending can serve as a signal of quality (which is the case in "money-burning" models of advertising) as long as the consumer's observability of advertising spending is imperfect. We also show that our results are robust to several other alternative model specifications, such as allowing heterogeneity of consumer preferences, asymmetric attributes, and multiple attributes cases.
The rest of this paper is organized in the following manner. In §2, we relate our paper to the existing literature in economics and marketing. Section 3 presents the model setup. We discuss the model results and its extensions in §§4 and 5, and we conclude in §6.
2. Literature Review
This paper contributes to the literature on informative advertising.5 The information that advertising provides can be direct, such as the existence of the product or its price (for example, Grossman and Shapiro 1984), or indirect, where the mere fact that the firm advertises signals the quality of the product (for example, Nelson 1974).
In the existing literature, "indirect" information has been associated with quality signaling. The most
5 There are also other perspectives on advertising, such as the persuasive and complementary views of advertising (see Bagwell 2007 for a comprehensive survey of the literature).

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

668

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

prominent theory of the quality-signaling role of advertising is known as the money-burning theory of advertising (see Nelson 1974, Kihlstrom and Riordan 1984, Milgrom and Roberts 1986, Bagwell and Ramey 1994, and Bagwell 2007 for a comprehensive review). According to this theory, the seller of an experience good (a product whose quality cannot be ascertained prior to experience) cannot credibly make direct claims about product quality in its ads. Instead, the high-quality firm can credibly convey its quality information indirectly through its advertising expenditure. Hence, one of the important takeaways of this theory is that it is the level of spending that signals the quality of the product, not the content of the message.
On the other hand, for search goods (whose quality can be ascertained before purchase), firms may convey quality information directly through the advertising message. Of course, if the information can be conveyed directly through advertising content, there may be no room for quality-signaling through advertising.6 However, we show that the signaling role of advertising is important even for search goods because of limited bandwidth. As we mentioned before, the limited bandwidth in advertising (Shapiro 2006, Bhardwaj et al. 2008) implies that the firm cannot perfectly convey quality information directly through its advertising message alone, and therefore, it cannot fully resolve the uncertainty concerning the product quality. Thus, the firm may choose to take further action to resolve this remaining uncertainty.
There are several papers that relate to the issue of advertising content. In particular, a number of papers have focused on direct information contained in the advertising message, such as price information or information about product existence. For example, Butters (1977), Grossman and Shapiro (1984), and Janssen and Non (2009) allow the firm to announce the existence of its product or price through advertising. Simester (1995) and Shin (2005) examine the credibility of price claims in advertising messages.
Recently, researchers have also started to incorporate advertising content (other than price) explicitly in their models. Anand and Shachar (2007) show that although advertising content plays no role in equilibrium, it may shape off-equilibrium beliefs. Anderson and Renault (2006) investigate the amount of and the type of information that a seller of search goods would choose to reveal in its advertising messages when consumers are imperfectly informed about
6 One notable exception is Anand and Shachar (2009), who investigate the signaling role of advertising for search goods. They suggest that the targeting of ads can also serve as a signal on the horizontal attributes of the product, whereas our model concerns a quality signal in a vertical setting.

product attributes and prices. That is, they investigate whether a firm would choose to inform consumers about product attributes and/or prices in the presence of consumer travel costs. Although our work is similar to Anderson and Renault (2006) in that we also find that the firm may strategically choose to withhold information in its advertising, the model setups and, hence, the mechanisms behind the two results are very different.7 In Anderson and Renault (2006), the travel cost creates a misalignment of incentives between the firm and the consumer. That is, whereas the firm wants to convey to a high-valuation consumer precise match information in order to encourage her to visit the store, the firm may not want to convey precise match information to a lowervaluation consumer before her visit. Because of this trade-off, the firm chooses to reveal only partial match information in its advertising. In this paper, on the other hand, the firm chooses to withhold information in order to encourage the consumer to obtain additional information on her own.
Researchers also find that the firm can signal its quality through actions other than advertising, such as product warranties (Moorthy and Srinivasan 1995), umbrella branding (Wernerfelt 1988), and the selling format (Bhardwaj et al. 2008). In particular, our model relates to Bhardwaj et al. (2008) in that both papers consider quality signaling in the presence of limited bandwidth in communication. However, there are important differences between the two papers. First, we focus on the content of the communication, whereas Bhardwaj et al. (2008) focus on who initiates the communication. That is, our model assumes that the firm always initiates communication and investigates whether attribute information should be communicated in an ad, whereas Bhardwaj et al. (2008) assume that attribute information is always sent and ask who should initiate the communication. Second, in our model the costly search is a decision variable on the part of the consumer, whereas in Bhardwaj et al. (2008), the search is costless and always occurs.
To summarize, our paper contributes to two different research streams in advertising: (1) the signaling role of advertising (or advertising as indirect information) and (2) the role of advertising content (or advertising as direct information). Existing literature finds that in the search goods case, the signaling role of advertising is irrelevant. However, under the limited bandwidth of advertising, the firm cannot perfectly
7 Sun (2011) also investigates the monopolistic seller's incentive to disclose the horizontal matching attributes of a product. Kuksov (2007) studies the incentives of consumers to reveal or conceal information about themselves to others through brand choices in the consumer-matching context. Yoganarasimhan (2009) finds that firms sometimes prefer to conceal information to increase the social value of their products.

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

669

convey its quality information in its advertising even for search goods. In this case, we show that advertising content can serve as an invitation for the consumer to search for further information on product quality. Hence, advertising content can signal product quality.
Also, our model contributes to the literature on countersignaling (Teoh and Hwang 1991, Feltovich et al. 2002, Araujo et al. 2007, Harbaugh and To 2008).8 In contrast to the standard signaling models where high types send a costly signal to separate themselves from the low types, in countersignaling models the high type chooses not to undertake a costly signaling action. People of average abilities, for example, get more education than bright people in labor markets (Hvide 2003). Mediocre firms reveal their favorable earnings information while both high-quality and low-quality firms tend to conceal their earnings information in the financial market (Teoh and Hwang 1991). Feltovich et al. (2002) formalize this intuition and show that in the presence of an external signal, the high type may pool with the low type while the medium type prefers to separate. Their motivating example is one of a job seeker, who has not seen his letters of recommendation, deciding whether or not to reveal his high school grades during an interview. We follow the setup of Feltovich et al. (2002) in that we also have three possible types of senders (in our case, the firm), and the receiver (the consumer in our case) can obtain an additional noisy signal on the firm's type.
Although our model's result is similar to the results in countersignaling models in that the high and low types pool on the same action, the advertising context makes it necessary for us to define a model that is significantly different from the extant countersignaling models. First, and most importantly, whereas in the previous countersignaling models (for example, Feltovich et al. 2002, Harbaugh and To 2008) the receiver is assumed to always receive the second signal, in our model the receiver (i.e., the consumer) is active and, hence, only receives this additional information if she chooses to search after observing the price and content of the advertising message. That is, we endogenize the presence of a second signal, which plays a critical role in enabling the equilibrium where the high and the low types pool on nonattributefocused advertising. Second, we also allow price to be a potential signal, which was not an issue in the earlier models. This has a substantive as well as a
8 A similar phenomenon is known in the sociology literature as the middle-status conformity theory: the high- and low-status players may deviate from conventional behavior while the middle-status players conform to social norms (Phillips and Zuckerman 2001). These models, however, do not involve a signaling story.

technical implication for the model. Substantively, the consumer's decision to search is critically affected by the price that the firm charges. Hence, depending on the level of price that the firm charges, different types of equilibria arise. Technically, endogenizing price and search allows us to identify conditions under which our focal equilibrium is unique. In contrast, in most countersignaling models, the countersignaling equilibrium is not unique. Finally, in existing countersignaling models, the high and low types do not undertake the costly signaling action (hence, the term "countersignaling"), whereas in our basic model all types engage in advertising, where the exact content differs by type.
Although we have focused on rational explanations for uninformative advertising, there are a number of behavioral-based explanations for this phenomenon (see Carpenter et al. 1994, Holbrook and O'Shaughnessy 1984, Kardes 2005, Scott 1994).9 These models emphasize the importance of both the cognitive and emotional responses to advertising. Because we predict that firms may choose to engage in uninformative advertising even in the absence of these psychological forces, our work complements these explanations.

3. Model
The game consists of one firm and one consumer. There is an informational asymmetry about the quality of the firm's product: the firm knows the quality of its product, whereas the consumer must infer the product's quality from signals that she receives from the firm as well as information that she may obtain on her own. In particular, the product consists of two attributes,  A a and  B b , where the capital letter stands for higher quality on that dimension. We also assume that an attribute is equally likely to be high or low quality, P = A = P = B = 1/2; and that there may be correlation between levels of the two attributes, P = B = A = P = A = B = P = b = a = P = a = b = , where 0 < < 1. Hence, there are three possible types ( ) of products based on the quality levels of the attributes:  H M L = A B A b or a B a b , with the a priori probabilities of ( /2, 1- , /2), respectively.10
The consumer has the following utility function:

u

=

u0

+

1 2

V¯

·

1

=A

+

1 2

V¯

·1

=B

(1)

9 Lauga (2010) incorporates a behavioral insight to propose a novel role of advertising as affecting the distribution of prior beliefs that consumers have about product quality. In this setting she shows that advertising does not necessarily signal the quality of the product.
10 Note that if = 1 (perfect positive correlation), only A B and a b products exist, and if = 2/3, all products are equally likely.

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

670

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

where 1 · indicates whether the attribute is high quality, and u0 is the basic utility from the product consumption. The consumer receives extra utility 1/2 V¯ when the quality of each attribute is high.11 Hence, a priori, the H-type product delivers utility u0 + V¯ to the consumer, the M-type delivers utility uo + V¯ /2, and the L-type delivers u0 utility. We further normalize u0 = 0 for simplicity.
Note that although the exact utility levels are not important to our results (for example, we can renormalize u0 > 0 to better capture the reality that even inferior products yield some utility to the consumer), the rank ordering of products from the consumer's perspective is important. Hence, all else equal, the consumer would prefer H to M, and M to L, which in turn implies that L wants to imitate H and M; M wants to separate itself from L and imitate H, and H wants to separate itself from M and L.
We also assume that the cost of advertising is zero, and the firm always advertises for awareness. This allows us to focus on the role of advertising content above and beyond the well-known effect of money burning, where the firm can signal its quality through the amount of its advertising spending. In §5.1, we investigate a nonzero advertising cost case where we allow the firm to decide the amount of advertising.
The firm's action space consists of its choice of price, p, and advertising, a. In particular, the firm has two possible advertising choices. First, the firm can choose an ad that centers on the product's attributes, an "attribute-focused" advertising ("attribute" advertising for short). Here, we impose the truth-telling assumption following the literature (Anderson and Renault 2006, Bhardwaj et al. 2008, Simester 1995): the firm cannot claim to be high quality on an attribute on which it is in fact low quality.12 This implies that while H and M can engage in either attributefocused or nonattribute-focused advertising (because both are high quality on at least one attribute), L can only engage in nonattribute-focused advertising because he cannot claim to be high quality on either attribute.13
To capture the reality of limited bandwidth inherent in a communication medium such as TV, we
11 For now, we assume that both attributes are equally important to the consumer, but we relax this assumption in §5.2.
12 The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) requires that "advertising be truthful and nondeceptive" and that all claims must have a "reasonable basis" (http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/buspubs/ ad-faqs.shtm). Whether in reality the FTC can perfectly enforce truth-telling is an interesting question but is beyond the scope of this paper.
13 Advertisers often advertise irrelevant or basic attributes. For example, any credit card can be used as a payment method and offers convenience to the consumer. Because all types can deliver these basic attributes, this type of ad is uninformative to the consumer. Therefore, we regard such an ad as nonattribute focused.

Table 1
Product type
L M H

All Types and Possible Actions

Attribute

Attribute

Expected utility

a

b

0

A (or a)

b (or B)

V¯ /2

A

B

V¯

Possible ads
a0 a0 aj a0 aj

Price
p0 p0 p0

allow the firm to transmit information about only one

attribute--either or : a = aj , where j 

. In

practice, a product contains a large number of fea-

tures. However, given the constraints on the time

available for communication as well as the limited

cognitive resources available to the consumer for pro-

cessing advertisement information (Shapiro 2006), the

firm is only able to communicate about a small sub-

set of these features (Bhardwaj et al 2008).14 In §5.3,

we extend this two-attribute model to a more gen-

eral multiattribute setting. We show that the critical

assumption is whether the bandwidth of advertising

is low enough so that the H type cannot distinguish

itself from the M type through the message alone.

In contrast to attribute-focused advertising, the

firm can choose not to emphasize any particular

attribute: a = a0. We refer to this as "nonattributefocused" advertising ("nonattribute" advertising for

short). In Table 1 we summarize the possible types

and the actions available to them.

Following Meurer and Stahl (1994), we assume that

the consumer can costlessly obtain information on the

firm price p after observing the ad.15 After the con-

sumer receives the advertising message and observes

the price, she can choose to invest a cost c in order

to discover the quality of the product. After incurring

this cost of search, the consumer obtains extra noisy

information about the product quality.16 This may

involve searching for online reviews (Chevalier and

Mayzlin 2006), observing word of mouth (Chen and

14 There are two possible sources of limited bandwidth in advertising. First, any one channel of communications has limited bandwidth, which is the supply-side source. The firm, however, may be able to bypass this limit by communicating through multiple channels. However, even if the firm is able to communicate about all of its attributes through multiple channels, it would be difficult for a consumer to process such a large amount of information as a result of limited cognitive resources. This demand limitation is the second source of limited bandwidth.
15 If the firm is not able to commit to the price initially, the consumer would not choose to invest in search because she would fear that the firm would charge a price that would extract all of her surplus. This is very similar to a holdup problem that occurs in the presence of consumer travel costs (see Wernerfelt 1994).
16 In reality, consumers may search for more than one signal (in particular, this may be more likely when the price is high). However, we abstract away from this and assume that the consumer can choose to obtain only one additional signal at cost c to capture our main result in the simplest possible way.

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

671

Figure 1

Timing of the Game Consumer observes advertising and price (a, p)

Consumer decides to purchase or not

Firm sends advertising message and charges a price (a, p)

Consumer decides whether to search for additional information or not · If search, she updates her belief (a, p, s) · If not, she updates her belief (a, p)

Time

Xie 2008, Godes and Mayzlin 2004), reading Consumer Reports, or doing other types of search activities. We assume that consumer search yields a binary signal on the product quality, s  s s¯ , where s¯ denotes positive news, and s denotes negative news. The search outcome is related to the product's quality level,  L M H , according to the following probabilities:

Pr s¯ =

and L < M < H

(2)

The firm knows that the consumer can obtain this extra information with the above probabilities but does not observe whether the consumer actually chooses to search for this extra signal, let alone what signal the consumer ultimately receives if she chooses to do so. The signal space of each type has the same support so that no signal is perfectly informative. Also, Equation (2) implies that the higher-quality firm is more likely to generate favorable information. This amounts to the MLRP (monotone likelihood ratio property) assumption over the signal space across types. In other words, positive news (s¯) is really "good news" regarding the firm's quality (Milgrom 1981).
For example, suppose that after viewing an ad for Canon PowerShot, Bob posts an inquiry about this camera on a digital photography forum. Because this camera's quality is excellent, Bob is likely to receive a positive recommendation. Bob is less likely to receive a positive review for Nikon Coolpix, which is more likely to disappoint a random consumer. This example illustrates several important points. First, the information the consumer receives through search is potentially richer than the information she can obtain after viewing an ad. The binary signal above can be viewed as a summary of all the product attributes. Second, even an excellent product may generate a negative signal: there is noise in the signal because of factors such as individual taste idiosyncrasies or promotional chat generated by firms, for example. However, a better product is more likely to yield a positive signal (Mayzlin 2006). Hence, the additional signal is informative but noisy.
After the consumer receives information regarding the product (through either advertising, prices,

or own research), she forms a belief on the qual-

ity of the product. Here, we signify by the con-

sumer's information set and by

the consumer's

belief. In particular,

=L

M

H

,

where L = Pr L , M = Pr M , H =

Pr H

. The consumer's information set ( )

includes the observation of advertising (a), the

price (p), and the consumer's own search (s), if that

takes place.

The consumer then decides whether to purchase

the product at its posted price based on the posterior

belief on its quality: a p s in the case of consumer

research and a p in the case of no search. We

assume that a consumer who is indifferent between

purchasing and not purchasing the product chooses

to purchase it. The timing of the model is summarized

in Figure 1.

4. Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
We start with the consumer's problem and then turn to the firm's strategy. The consumer observes advertising and price, (a p), and decides whether to search for additional information before making the final purchase decision. If the consumer is uncertain about the firm's type even after observing the price and advertising, she can either (1) forgo search for additional information and make a purchase decision based on her belief, a p , which we abbreviate to ; or (2) search for additional information s at cost c. In the absence of additional search, the consumer buys the product if and only if E V - p  0 That is, she buys the product if the prior belief is relatively favorable or the price is relatively low. The consumer will search for additional information if

E U search  E U no search  max 0 E V

-p (3)

Note that the consumer undertakes a costly search only if her decision to purchase differs depending on the outcome of the signal (i.e., there must be value in the information acquired). In other words, when the consumer chooses to search, she buys only if the signal is high (s = s¯). The conditions for when the consumer chooses to search are specified in the following lemma.

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

672

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

Lemma 1 (Consumer Search). 1. If E V

-

p  0, the consumer will search for additional informa-

tion iff

c  Pr s p - E V s

c

 E V s + Pr s  p

(4)

2. If E V - p < 0, the consumer will search for additional information iff

c  Pr s¯ E V s¯ - p

c

 p  E V s¯ - Pr s¯

(5)

Moreover, when p = E V ,

Pr s · p - E V s = Pr s¯ E V s¯ - p
Proof. See the appendix.
Equations (4) and (5) compare the marginal cost and the marginal benefit of search. The marginal cost of search (the left-hand side of Equations (4) and (5)) is c. The marginal benefit is represented by the righthand side of these equations and differs depending on the price. If E V - p  0, the consumer would choose to buy the product based on the prior alone in the absence of an additional signal. Hence, the marginal benefit of search is in preventing purchase in the case when the signal is negative (s = s). On the other hand, when E V - p < 0, the consumer would not purchase the product in the absence of an additional signal. Therefore, the marginal benefit of search is in enabling the consumer to purchase the product in the case when the signal is positive (s = s¯). Note that if the conditions in either Equation (4) or Equation (5) hold, then Equation (3) holds; that is, the consumer chooses to search before making her purchase decision.
One implication of Lemma 1 is that given a belief, the consumer chooses to search for additional information only if the product's price is within a certain range (see Lemma 2 in the appendix for more details). Hence, we can identify the range of prices and beliefs that ensures the existence of consumer search. For example, Figure 2 illustrates the consumer's decision to search for extra information when the consumer is not certain whether the firm is H or M type. This can occur if the consumer observes an attribute ad, which implies that the product is not L type but could be either H or M type. In Figure 2, the prior belief H (the probability that the product is H type) is graphed on the x axis (where 0  H  1).
For a given belief ( ^ H ), if the price is low enough (p < p ^ H ), the consumer prefers to buy the product without further search (see point D in Figure 2). As

Figure 2
p V­ p­

Consumer Beliefs and Optimal Response Behaviors

p( H): Indifferent between "do not purchase" and "search"

E(V | H) = p

A

B

C

­p

­

D

V 2

p( H): Indifferent

between "purchase"

and "search"

0

­

H

H

­

1

we mentioned in our discussion of Lemma 1, at relatively low levels of p, i.e., p  E V ^ H , the value of additional search is in preventing purchase when the outcome of search is negative, which in this case is captured by p - E V ^ H s . Hence, when p is low, the marginal benefit of search is not high enough to justify the cost of search. At any point on the convex curve p = p H , the consumer is indifferent between buying without search or engaging in further search. At a higher price ( p < p ^ H < p¯), the consumer prefers to search (see points B and C in Figure 2). That is, here the consumer incurs a cost c to obtain an additional signal and purchases if and only if the outcome is positive, s = s¯, since E V ^ H s¯ > p and E V ^ H s < p. On the other hand, at any point on the concave curve p = p¯ H , the consumer is indifferent between no purchase and engaging in further search, and at p > p¯ ^ H the price is so high that the consumer surplus obtained even in the case when the outcome of search is positive (E V ^ H s¯ - p) is not high enough to justify the cost of search (see point A in Figure 2). As we can see from the figure, given ^ H , the consumer chooses to search for additional information only if p  p ^ H p¯ ^ H . Moreover, if the belief is extreme, ( H < or H > ¯ ), and therefore there is little uncertainty, the consumer does not engage in search at any price. Only at the high level of uncertainty, which occurs at the intermediate level of the belief, H  ¯ , does there exist a price range at which search occurs. Note that the cutoff beliefs,
¯ , are a function of the search cost c As c increases, the range ¯ decreases and becomes empty when
c > V¯ H - M /8V¯ (see Lemma 2 in the appendix). That is, search will not occur under any belief if the search cost is sufficiently high. Because we want to model an active consumer who can choose to engage in her own search, we focus on the region of the

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

673

parameter space where the cost c is low enough such that search is a feasible option to the consumer.17
Assumption. Search cost is low enough such that c  V¯ H - M /8V¯ .
What is the potential role of search in our model? As we can see from Figure 2 above, given the prior belief ^ H , the possibility of consumer search allows the firm to charge a higher price (see point B in Figure 2, for example) compared with a situation where no consumer search is possible, in which case the maximum the firm can charge is p = E V ^ H . That is, the fact that the consumer can undertake an action to resolve the uncertainty surrounding the firm's quality enables the firm to charge a higher price. In this sense, the firm may want to invite the consumer to search. We can think of this as the benefit of search to the firm. However, whereas the possibility of search increases the upside of a transaction through higher price, it also introduces the possibility that no transaction occurs in the case when the consumer receives a negative signal, which may happen even for the highest type because the signal is noisy. We can think of the no-transaction outcome as the cost of search (or alternatively as the risk inherent in search) to the firm. Because the probability of a negative signal differs across different types, search is differentially costly to different quality types. Therefore, the firm that "invites" the consumer to search through an advertising action may be able to signal its quality by credibly demonstrating its confidence in the outcome of the search.
We next consider the firm's strategy and the equilibrium of the game. We focus on pure strategies only. Hence, each type chooses an advertising and price combination: a p , where  L M H . There are a number of equilibria that are possible, ranging from full separation to full pooling (see Table 2). For example, in HM equilibrium, the H and M types send out the same advertising message and post the same price, whereas the L type differs in at least one of these actions: aH pH = aM pM  aHM pHM = aL pL . This in turn implies that if the consumer observes aL pL , she infers that the product is L type. On the other hand, if she observes aHM pHM , she is uncertain whether the firm is H type or M type. Her decision to search for extra information depends on her prior belief as well as the price p. Although the advertising action choice is discrete (an advertising action can be either attribute focused or nonattribute focused), the price variable is continuous, which implies that a continuum of prices is possible for each type of equilibrium.
17 This low search cost assumption guarantees that there always exists a consumer belief under which search is the best response for the consumer if she observes either a0 or aj . See Lemma 2 in the appendix for more details.

Table 2 All Possible Equilibria

Equilibrium type

Description

Full separating Semi-separating Semi-separating Semi-separating Full pooling

H M L separate H M pool H L pool M L pool H M L pool

Notation
FS HM HL ML HML

We can quickly rule out two potential equilibria: the fully separating equilibrium (F S) and the semiseparating equilibrium, where M and L pool (ML) by contradiction. Suppose that there exists a fully separating equilibrium, FS. Full separation implies that the consumer can simply infer the product's type by examining its advertising and the price. Furthermore, in this equilibrium, the consumer does not search because search is costly and the product's type can be perfectly observed. That is, aL pL = aM pM = aH pH . From our model assumptions, the L type can only send a nonattribute-focused uninformative ad: aL = a0. Also, note that if pH > pM , the M type will deviate to H strategy, and if pH < pM , the H type will deviate to M's strategy because the consumer will not search in this equilibrium. This implies that pH = pM = p~. This in turn implies that it must be the case that aH = aM in equilibrium. Hence, either H or M must engage in nonattribute advertising in the F S equilibrium. Suppose that aH = a0, and let p~ < pL. This, of course, implies that H will mimic L's strategy. If, on the other hand, p~ > pL, L will mimic H 's strategy. Hence, it must be the case that p~ = pL, which implies that aL pL = aH pH = a0 p~ . This contradicts the initial assertion that aL pL = aM pM = aH pH ; therefore, a fully separating equilibrium does not exist in our model.
Proposition 1. A fully separating equilibrium does not exist.
The result above illustrates the importance of search in enabling signaling in our model. Consumer search cannot occur in a fully separating equilibrium because the consumer has no uncertainty about the firm type after observing price and advertising. The assumption that there are more types (three types) than possible advertising actions (two possible actions: attribute versus nonattribute ad) results in at least some pooling between different types in advertising action. The remaining question is then whether price can differentiate between types in the absence of search by the consumer. As is illustrated in the proof above, price alone cannot signal quality because our model does not have any of the elements (such as differential costs, demand, or profits from repeat purchases) that would ordinarily enable price to be a signal of quality in standard signaling models. Instead, as we show

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

674

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

below, it is consumer search (coupled with price) that

enables signaling in our model.18

Similarly, we can show that the semi-separating

equilibrium ML, where M and L types pool, cannot

exist. In ML, it must be the case that pL = pM  pML, and aL = aM = a0. Note that pML < V¯ /2, since even with search the consumer cannot be absolutely certain

that the product is not L type. However, if the M type

deviates to aj , j 

, it can charge at least V¯ /2

because an attribute message credibly signals that it is

not L. Intuitively, because M is able to perfectly sepa-

rate itself from L through advertising, it prefers to do

so. Hence, an equilibrium where M and L pool does

not exist.

Proposition 2. ML equilibrium does not exist.

The remaining three equilibria (HML, HM, and HL) can be categorized into two types: one in which H separates from M (HL) and one in which H pools with M (HML and HM).
As is the case for any signaling model, we have to deal with the technical issue of specifying the out-ofequilibrium beliefs. There are two main approaches to dealing with this. The first is to assume a particular set of beliefs following a deviation (see, for example, McAfee and Schwartz 1994). Although this method is often used, it is vulnerable to the criticism that any specific set of chosen beliefs is, by definition, arbitrary. The second approach is to start with an unconstrained set of out-of-equilibrium beliefs but then narrow it using an existing refinement. The strength of this approach is that it imposes some structure on the out-of-equilibrium beliefs--a belief that is consistent with a refinement is more "reasonable." A number of signaling models employ the intuitive criterion (Cho and Kreps 1987) to refine the beliefs (for example, Simester 1995, Desai and Srinivasan 1995). The idea behind this criterion is as follows. Suppose that the consumer observes the deviation A1 = a p . If type makes a lower profit in deviation than in equilibrium under all possible consumer beliefs, the consumer does not believe that the

18 A separating equilibrium result in signaling models requires that the single-crossing property be imposed across types. In existing models, the single-crossing property is exogenously imposed through differential production costs or demand (Schmalensee 1978, Milgrom and Roberts 1986, Bagwell and Ramey 1994). Our model departs from these models in that the single-crossing property here arises from the consumer's endogenous search. If we also allow for production costs to differ across types (see Schmalensee 1978) and for firms to be able to convey this cost information to the consumer, our main results unravel because the consumer can perfectly infer the product quality from the product cost information. However, credibly conveying cost information in an advertising message is very difficult because product cost information is not easily observable or verifiable. Hence, we assume that fully conveying cost or attribute information is not possible. We thank the associate editor for raising this issue.

product could be type . That is, if the L type would not benefit from the deviation even under the most optimistic belief, H = 1, the consumer does not think that the deviating firm could be type L. In our model, however, no search occurs under extreme beliefs, such as H = 1, because the consumer would rationally choose not to search under certainty. Of course, if search does not occur, all types equally benefit (or are hurt) by a deviation, as was illustrated in our discussion following Proposition 1. Hence, the intuitive criterion does not narrow the beliefs in our model; in other words, any out-of-equilibrium belief in our model can survive the intuitive criterion.
Instead, and following other countersignaling papers (for example, Feltovich et al. 2002, Harbaugh and To 2008), we use a stronger refinement, the D1 criterion (Fudenberg and Tirole 1991), to eliminate unreasonable out-of-equilibrium beliefs. The idea behind this refinement is roughly as follows. Consider the set of best responses associated with a particular out-of-equilibrium belief. Suppose that the H type benefits from the deviation under a bigger set of best responses than the L type. Moreover, this is the case for all possible beliefs. D1 then requires that the consumer does not believe that the deviating type is L. More generally, suppose that in deviation A1 = a p , type makes higher profit than in equilibrium under a strictly bigger set of best responses from the consumer than type does. D1 then requires that the consumer does not believe that the product could be type .
Unlike the intuitive criterion, D1 does not require that the L type must not benefit from the deviation under any possible belief. Instead, it requires that the set of consumer's best responses, which are based on the consumer's beliefs, should be strictly smaller than that of H type. We require that a potential equilibrium must be supported by out-of-equilibrium beliefs that survive not only the intuitive criterion but also even the stronger D1 refinement. We discuss the D1 criterion and its application in the appendix.
4.1. The Countersignaling HL Equilibrium We first consider the equilibrium that is the core of this paper: HL equilibrium. In this equilibrium, the H and L types pool on nonattribute advertising and price, whereas the M type engages in attribute advertising and perfectly reveals its type to the consumer. Since in Feltovich et al. (2002), the high and the low types undertake the same action, we refer to this equilibrium as the countersignaling equilibrium. Surprisingly, in this equilibrium the type with the most to say (the H type) chooses a message devoid of any information on product attributes, whereas the mediocre type (the M type) chooses to make product attribute claims in its ads. It is this HL equilibrium

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

675

that explains the fact that we observe both types of ads (attribute and nonattribute) in practice and why sometimes high-quality brands choose not to mention specific product attributes in their advertisements.
We first characterize the equilibrium and demonstrate its existence. Second, we show that HL equilibrium survives the D1 refinement, and we highlight that search is necessary for the existence of the HL equilibrium. Finally, we show that the HL equilibrium is unique in §4.2.
Proposition 3. A semi-separating HL equilibrium exists if

max 1 - H V¯ + 2c V¯ < min H V¯ - 2c V¯

2- H - L 2 H

H+ L 2 M

In this equilibrium, H and L types pool on (a0 pH L , where

max 1 - H V¯ + 2c V¯ 2- H - L 2 H
< min H V¯ - 2c V¯ H+ L 2 M

 pH L

whereas the M type separates on (aj pM = V¯ /2 . The consumer chooses to search when she observes (a0 pH L and purchases the product only if she receives good news (s = s¯). Here,  H >  M >  L .
Proof. See the appendix.
The proposition demonstrates the existence of the HL equilibrium with consumer search. The condition for existence presented in Proposition 3 summarizes several restrictions on the model parameters. First, consider the consumer's optimal strategy, given the firm's equilibrium pricing and advertising strategy. Based on Lemma 1 and given equilibrium beliefs, the consumer chooses to search for additional information following (a0 pH L as long as the equilibrium price is not too low or too high:

1- 2-

H V¯ + 2c H- L



pH L

<

H V¯ - 2c H+ L

If the price is too low such that pH L < 1 - H V¯ + 2c / 2 - H - L , the consumer's best
response is to buy without search. Also, if the price
is too high such that pH L > H V¯ - 2c / H + L , the consumer's best response is not to purchase. In the
proof in the appendix, we show that if the search
cost is low enough (c  V¯ H - M /8 V¯ ), there always exists a price pH L such that the consumer would choose to search in equilibrium.
Next, we turn to the firm's problem. In equilib-
rium, all types prefer their equilibrium strategies to
the optimal deviation. Of course, the optimal devi-
ation depends on the out-of-equilibrium beliefs. To

show existence, we assume the following out-of-
equilibrium beliefs: L = 1 for all a0 p = pH L and H = 0 for all aj p = V¯ /2 (below we show that this
belief is indeed reasonable, i.e., survives the D1 refine-
ment). Given this, the firm's nondeviation conditions
are the following:

V¯  a0 pH L q = H = H pH L > maxA1 A1 q = H = 2
V¯  aj pM q = M = 2 > maxA1 A1 q = M = M pH L  a0 pH L q = L = LpH L > maxA1 A1 q = L = 0
(6)

This reduces to the following conditions: H pH L > V¯ /2 and M pH L < V¯ /2 which implies that for the equilibrium to hold, it must be the case that H is high relative to M . We can equivalently express this as a condition on price: V¯ / 2 H < pH L < V¯ / 2 M .
Combining these two conditions, we obtain the
result that HL equilibrium with search exists if the
equilibrium price is in the right range such that

max 1 - H V¯ + 2c V¯ 2- H - L 2 H
< min H V¯ - 2c V¯ H+ L 2 M

< pH L

Hence, there exists a pooling price, pH L, that supports the HL equilibrium with search if

max 1 - H V¯ + 2c V¯ < min H V¯ - 2c V¯

2- H - L 2 H

H+ L 2 M

From the condition on price, it is clearly the case that pH L > V¯ /2, which implies that the H type can charge a quality premium based on the reduced consumer uncertainty under consumer search. That is, in the case when the consumer receives good news (s = s¯), she is willing to pay a higher price compared with the price she is willing to pay for the M type. Hence, the H type may prefer to extend an invitation to search to the consumer by pooling with the L type on nonattribute advertising when it is confident that the consumer is more likely to receive good news (i.e., H is sufficiently large).
Next, we show that this equilibrium can survive the D1 refinement.

Proposition 4. A semi-separating HL equilibrium where the consumer chooses to search after observing a0, pH L exists and survives D1 if

H - M p¯j + V¯ /2 1 - H < min H 1- M

H V¯ - 2c V¯ H+ L 2 M

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

676

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

where

p¯j

=

3 V¯ 4

+

V¯ 2/4

H - M 2 - 2V¯ c 2 H- M

Proof. See the appendix.

H- M

In Lemma 3 in the appendix, we characterize the properties of beliefs imposed by D1 and show that the belief we assumed above, L = 1 for all a0 p = pH L and H = 0 for all aj p = V¯ /2 , is consistent with D1. Note that in addition to the conditions we had in Proposition 3, D1 imposes a new lower limit on price.19 Because not all of the conditions are binding, the constraints reduce to the ones given in Proposition 4.
To summarize, we have shown in Proposition 3 that the countersignaling HL equilibrium, where the best and the worst types pool on nonattribute advertising, can exist. In other words, advertising content can signal quality. In Proposition 4 we show that this equilibrium survives the D1 refinement. This demonstrates the robustness of HL equilibrium because D1 eliminates equilibria that are supported by unreasonable out-of-equilibrium beliefs.

4.1.1. Discussion. When do we expect to observe the HL equilibrium? From Equation (6), for the HL equilibrium with consumer search to exist, it must be the case that H is sufficiently large and M is sufficiently small. Here, the H type prefers to pool with the L type on nonattribute advertising rather than pursue an attribute-focused strategy that perfectly signals that the firm is not the L type. Because the additional signal associated with each type is noisy, after a nonattribute ad and own search, the consumer may mistake the H type for the L type. Therefore, the risk H bears by pooling with L must be relatively small ( H is large) such that the H type prefers this to the certain outcome of pretending to be the M type by engaging in an attribute ad. Moreover, when H is sufficiently large relative to L, the consumer is willing to pay a higher price following good news (s = s¯) because she is confident that the product is the H type and not the L type. Hence, when H is large, not only is the probability of a transaction high but also the price charged can increase. This is the source of H's confidence in extending the invitation to search to the consumer. On the other hand, the M type prefers to separate itself from the L type rather than pool with it. This can happen only if the additional signal cannot effectively separate between M and L types

19 We find that if pH L is low enough, then there exists a deviation A1 = aj pdev > pH L such that D1 imposes H A1 = 1. This, of course, would destroy HL. Hence, to rule this out, we need
the additional constraint that pH L  H - M p¯j + V¯ /2 1 - H / H 1 - M See the appendix for more details.

(in other words, M is small). Hence, M lacks H 's confidence and prefers not to mimic H because the probability that it may be misjudged as L is too high. That is, whereas the H type is willing to relinquish control in its communication strategy (by engaging in nonattribute advertising with an uncertain outcome following consumer search), the M type prefers the lower-risk attribute-focused strategy.
Finally, note that in equilibrium, all types make a positive profit. In particular, the L type is able to extract rents that arise as a result of the consumer's mistakes as the result of search. However, L's profit is strictly lower than those of the H and M types:
V¯  H = H pH L >  M = 2 >  L = LpH L > 0
As the noise associated with L's signal decreases ( L decreases), L's profit decreases.
As we see from the discussion above, consumer search is the core mechanism which enables signaling in equilibrium. In fact, we can formally show that this equilibrium does not exist without consumer search (see the electronic companion, available as part of the online version that can be found at http:// mktsci.pubs.informs.org/, for the formal proof). Without consumer search, the firm is constrained to charge a relatively low price because of the consumer's uncertainty about product quality. The maximum price that H and L can charge in equilibrium when the consumer decides not to search is strictly less than V¯ /2 when the search cost is sufficiently low. Hence, the H type would prefer to deviate in order to signal that it is not type L, which destroys this potential equilibrium.
4.2. Other Equilibria and Uniqueness of HL In the preceding section, we show that the H type can signal its quality by extending an invitation to search to the consumer through nonattribute advertising. Can there be other equilibria where the M type extends this invitation? As we show below, there indeed exist other equilibria (HML and HM) where M extends an invitation to search. In the HML full pooling equilibrium, all types engage in nonattribute advertising, and the consumer chooses to search in equilibrium following a nonattribute ad. Note that while nonattribute advertising is an invitation to search in HML, it is not a signal of higher quality. In contrast, in the HM semi-separating equilibrium, H and M types engage in attribute advertising, and the consumer chooses to search following an attribute ad. Hence, in this equilibrium an attribute ad serves as an invitation to search, while a nonattribute ad reveals that the firm is L type. In this semi-separating equilibrium, and in contrast to HL, both H and M types choose to emphasize their strong attribute: the firm

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

677

that has anything positive to say about its product chooses to do so. In this sense, this equilibrium is a very intuitive one.
We show that these other equilibria exist only if M is high enough; the mediocre type is willing to extend an invitation to search only if it is fairly certain that the outcome of search will be positive. In other words, if M is low or the mediocre type is not confident in the outcome of the search process, only the HL countersignaling equilibrium exists, as we show in Proposition 6.

Proposition 5. Suppose that search cost is low enough
such that c  V¯ /2 1 - H - M . 1. A full pooling equilibrium HML where the con-
sumer chooses to search after observing a0, pH ML , exists and survives D1 if M is sufficiently high and the price is in the intermediate range.
2. A semi-separating HM equilibrium, where the con-
sumer chooses to search after observing aj , pH M , exists and survives D1 if M is sufficiently high and the price is in the higher range.
3. Without consumer search, HML and HM do not sur-
vive D1.

Proof. See the electronic companion.

The basic conditions for the existence of an equi-
librium with consumer search are the same for HM
and HML. That is, for either equilibrium to exist,
(1) the cost search must be small enough compared to
H - M , (2) the price must be in a range that ensures that the consumer chooses to search in equilibrium, and (3) M must be high enough.20
Finally, we show that when H is large and M is low, HL is the only equilibrium that survives the D1
refinement.

Proposition 6. Under D1, HL equilibrium is unique when H is sufficiently large and M is sufficiently small such that
1.

max 1 - H V¯ + 2c V¯ < min H V¯ - 2c V¯

2- H - L 2 H

H+ L 2 M

20 Please see the electronic companion for the exact statement of the existence conditions, such as the conditions on M and the price bounds. In HM equilibrium, plays an important role in the decision to search. Recall that is the correlation between attributes, which in this equilibrium translates to a prior belief about the product's type following aj since Pr H aj = Pr = B = A = . The consumer chooses to search only if the search cost is low enough relative to the benefit that can be obtained through seeking additional information, that is, resolving the uncertainty. Therefore, if is either close to 1 or 0, there is little remaining uncertainty on whether the firm is an H type or M type following aj . This, in turn, implies that search would not arise in equilibrium unless the search cost is also close to zero. Hence, depending on the magnitude of the search cost c and the correlation , HM equilibrium with search may or may not exist.

2. c < V¯ /2 1 - H - M and M < V¯ / 2p¯HM . Moreover, this region is nonempty.
Proof. See the appendix.
In summary, in HML and HM, the M type extends an invitation to search, which implies that the consumer only buys the product with probability M (the probability that M receives a positive signal following search). In contrast, in HL, by revealing its type, M faces lower risk because the consumer has no uncertainty. This decrease in uncertainty, however, comes with a lower upside potential, because in this case M cannot charge more than V¯ /2. The amount of risk that M faces--summarized by M , where a higher M entails a lower risk--determines whether M is willing to extend the invitation to search. That is, for HML and HM to exist, M must be high enough. However, if M is low or the mediocre type is not confident in the outcome of the search process, the HL countersignaling equilibrium is the only equilibrium that survives D1.
5. Extensions
We extend our basic model by relaxing several key assumptions. First, we introduce a cost of advertising (which we assumed to be zero in our basic model) and let the firm choose the amount of its advertising spending. Second, we allow for heterogeneity of consumer preferences and consider the case where the consumer has asymmetric preferences over product attributes. Finally, we relax our assumption of two attributes and extend the model to include multiple attributes. All the proofs of the propositions can be found in the electronic companion.
5.1. Advertising Costs and Endogenous Advertising Spending
First, we introduce a cost of advertising and expand the model by allowing the firm to choose the level of advertising spending that optimizes the reach of the message.21 Following Grossman and Shapiro (1984), we assume that the consumer becomes aware of the product's existence and price only by receiving an ad from the firm. If, however, she does not receive an ad, she is not aware of the product's existence and hence does not purchase it. This specification highlights the distinction between no advertising, in which case the consumer is unaware of the product, and nonattribute advertising, in which case the consumer becomes aware of the product's existence. The probability that the consumer receives the advertising is , and the firm can invest resources into increasing
21 We thank the associate editor for encouraging us to pursue the implications of a positive advertising cost.

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

678

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

the reach of the advertising campaign. We assume a simple cost function, C = 2/2, as in Tirole (1988).
Here, we assume that the firm's total advertising expenditure, or the reach of advertising campaign ( ), is not perfectly observable to the consumer. That is, the consumer only observes whether an ad successfully reaches her, which can potentially serve as a noisy signal of quality, because in equilibrium, different types choose different levels of advertising spending. The imperfect observability of advertising expenditure is a realistic assumption under many circumstances given the fact that firms usually adopt several advertising campaigns over various media to reach different consumer segments (Hertzendorf 1993). This is what differentiates our model from money-burning models, where the consumer is assumed to perfectly observe the firm's advertising spending. Because total ad spending is perfectly observable in the latter, it serves as a perfect signal of quality, and advertising content becomes redundant. However, as long as the consumer has limited observability, a countersignaling HL equilibrium exists, and thus advertising content can signal quality.
Proposition 7. HL equilibrium with consumer search exists if

max

H 1 - H V¯ + c L +

H+

L-

2 L

-

2 H

< min

2 H

V¯

-

c

L+ H

2 H

+

2 L

H V¯ 2H
V¯ 2M

Here,

 H

=

H pH L >

 M

=

V¯

/2

>

 L

=

LpH L > 0 and

H =

2 H

pH L

2

>

2

V¯ 2 M = 2 >

L =

2 L

pH L

2

2

As we can see from the proposition above, while

all types advertise in equilibrium, the reach of the

advertising campaign is increasing in the firm type

(

 H

>

 M

>

 L

).

This

is

consistent

with

the

finding

in

the money-burning literature where the higher type

invests more in advertising. This implies that the con-

sumer who observes a0 pH L infers that the sender

is more likely to be H type than L type since

 H

>

L. In other words, the mere fact that the ad reached

the consumer signals that it is more likely to be the

H type. However, because the L type does advertise

(

 L

>

0),

there

is

remaining

uncertainty

on

whether

the firm is H or L type, which results in search if the

price is in the appropriate range.

5.2. Consumer Heterogeneity and Asymmetric Attributes
Next, we introduce heterogeneity in consumer valuations and asymmetry between the two attributes. Here, we

assume that there are two types of consumers. The

first segment (of size 1 - ) derives only a basic util-

ity (u = u0) from the product, and its utility function is not sensitive to the attributes that the product pos-

sesses. Because search is costly, the consumers in this

segment never search for quality information. In con-

trast, the second segment (of size is affected by the

quality of the product and therefore may choose to

search for additional information on product quality.

Moreover, we assume that the utility derived from the

high quality level differs across the attributes. Hence,

the consumer in the second segment derives the util-

ity, u = u0 + V¯ · 1 = A + 1 - V¯ · 1 = B where the parameter captures the relative importance of

attribute . Without loss of generality, we assume that

attribute

is

relatively

more

important

(

1 2



 1).

Note that under this asymmetric specification,

there are four possible types ( ) of products

based on the quality levels of the attributes: 

H M M L = A B A b , a B a b . In con-

trast, under the symmetric case of our basic model,

where the consumer values the two attributes equally,

the type space essentially reduces to three types,

 H M L because the consumer is indifferent

between types M and M . Hence, in the asymmetric

case, we have to consider the incentives of all four

types. In Proposition 8, we show that HL still exists in

the presence of customer heterogeneity and attribute

asymmetry.22

Proposition 8. HL equilibrium with consumer search exists if

min 1- H u0 +V¯ + 1- L u0 +2c u0 u0 + V¯

2- H - L

L

H

< max H u0 +V¯ + Lu0 -2c u0 + 1- V¯

H+ L

M

Here,

H = =

H pH L >  M = u0 + V¯ >  M u0 + 1 - V¯ >  L = LpH L

Proposition 8 not only serves as a robustness check of our basic results but also suggests several important boundary conditions for the existence of the HL equilibrium. Consider the nondeviation conditions for L, M, and H (which are contained in the condition given in Proposition 8):

L>

u0 pH L

M

<

u0

+

1- pH L

V¯

and

22 In this equilibrium, H and L types pool on nonattribute advertising and price (a0 pH L), whereas the M types engage in attribute advertising and, therefore, perfectly reveal their types to the consumer (aM = aj pM = u0 + V¯ pM = u0 + 1 - V¯ ).

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

679

u0 + V¯ < pH L

H

(7)

We can see that for the L type not to deviate from its equilibrium, the ratio u0/ pH L must be low enough. That is, for the HL equilibrium to hold, it must be the case that a sizable segment of the population values the quality of the attributes (large ), and the basic utility derived from the product should be relatively small (small u0). Otherwise, the L type would find it profitable to deviate and reveal its type perfectly by charging the lower price u0, which ensures that it can serve both segments and therefore earn a profit of u0. This condition highlights the point that HL holds only when the attribute levels and, hence the quality of the product, is relatively important.
Second, Proposition 8 suggests that when the attribute asymmetry is sufficiently large such that essentially only one attribute matters, the HL equilibrium does not exist. Consider the scenario where attribute is far more important than attribute (i.e., high ). This implies that the M type is perceived as very similar to the H type from the consumer's perspective because only the quality of attribute matters to her. Therefore, the H type would prefer to claim to be the M type rather than take the risk of being confused with the L type by pooling (i.e., H 's nondeviation condition u0 + V¯ /pH L < H does not hold as  1 because the consumer would not be willing to pay pH L > u0 + V¯ .

5.3. n-Attribute Case n > 2

Finally, we consider the more general model where

products have more than two attributes. Suppose that

a product has n >2) attributes: b1 b2

bn , where

bj = Q q , with the capital letter representing higher

quality on that dimension. The H type is high qual-

ity on h attributes, the M type is high quality on

m attributes, and the L type is high quality on only

the basic l attributes (n > h > m > l . A priori, the con-

sumer's expected utilities from H M, and L types are

hV¯ /n mV¯ /n, and lV¯ /n, respectively.

Because of limited bandwidth, the firm can only

communicate up to k attributes in an advertising mes-

sage. The crucial assumption is how large k (com-

munication bandwidth) is relative to the number of

attributes along which the M type is high quality.23

That is, if k > m, an attribute ad that emphasizes m + 1

attributes would allow the H type to perfectly separate

itself from the M type. On the other hand, if k  m, the

ad alone cannot separate the M and H types because

the number of attributes at that the M type is high

quality is greater than the number of attributes that

23 We thank the editor and an anonymous reviewer for pointing this issue out to us.

can be communicated in an ad. Hence, in the multiattribute setting, the latter assumption represents the case of limited bandwidth. To link it back to our main model, we can think of as the set of the k attributes that the firm emphasizes in an ad and as the remaining set of attributes. Not surprisingly, as long as there exists limited bandwidth in communication (k  m), our main results continue to hold.24
Proposition 9. When k  m, HL equilibrium with consumer search exists if (1) c  h - m V¯ H - M /4n, and (2)

max h 1 - H V¯ + 2nc mV¯ lV¯ n 2- H - L n H n L
< min h H V¯ - 2nc mV¯ n H+ L n M
Here,  H = H pH L >  M = mV¯ /n > LpH L.25

L =

6. Conclusion and Limitations
We show that advertising content can be a credible quality signal under the realistic assumptions of limited bandwidth of communication and active consumers. The desire to signal one's quality may result in the surprising phenomenon that the firm with the most to say may choose not to make any hard claims at all. This withholding strategy may be rational in that vague claims can be made by either the superior or the terrible products, which necessitates search for further information on the part of the consumer. Hence, vague claims serve as an invitation to search. Consumer search that is determined endogenously is crucial in enabling this type of equilibrium. Whereas most of the previous literature has focused on the decision to advertise (the mere fact that the firm is willing to burn its money) as a signal of quality, we show that message content, coupled with consumer

24 Interestingly, we can also endogenize the (the probability of positive signal following search) as a function of the number of attributes along which the product is high quality (h m and l). Suppose that the consumer talks to her friend about the product, and her friend focuses on a few attributes in her recommendation. Clearly, this would imply that the probability that the word of mouth about the product is positive would be a function of the number of high-quality attributes that the product possesses. In this setting, we would expect H to be increasing in h, M to be increasing in m, and L to be increasing in l (in the simplest specification,
H = h/n, M = m/n, L = l/n . Hence, this specification would provide a microfoundation for (1) our assumption that H > M > L because the probability of good news for each type is a function of the number of attributes on which it is high quality, and (2) our assumption that L > 0 and H < 1 because even the highest type is low quality on some attributes, and the lowest type is high quality on some attributes.
25 Our main result is a special case of this general result when n = 2 h = 2 and m = 1.

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

680

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

search, can also serve as a credible signal of quality. Hence, we provide an explanation for why we sometimes observe high-quality brands choosing ads that make no mention of their product's strong attributes.
In the electronic companion, we provide an example of consumer behavior in a laboratory setting that is consistent with our theoretical predictions. That is, we show that (1) consumers may not always view nonattribute ads as being associated with highquality products, and (2) compared with attribute ads, nonattribute ads may increase consumers' likelihood to search for information about the product.
There are a number of limitations to the current work. First, our model abstracts away from a number of phenomena that may be important in practice. We investigate a monopoly setting, where the firm can be one of three types. Although it is technically challenging to extend the signaling mechanism to a competitive setting, it would be interesting to investigate how the current insights can be extended to a competitive situation in the future. We also abstract away from the possibility that firms can employ several different advertising campaigns. Allowing multiple campaigns relates to the important marketing issue of targeting and segmentation. As the firms gain the ability to personalize their ads to the viewers (through technologies such as search advertising), they can target each segment through emphasizing those attributes that it particularly values. In this case, the truly excellent firm may not need to invite consumers to search. It may instead persuade the consumer to buy its product by emphasizing the attributes that are tailored to her segment.
Also, there are several simplifying assumptions in the model that can be relaxed in future work. First, we impose the truth-telling assumption: we assume that a firm cannot claim to be strong on an attribute on which it is in fact weak. In reality, firms may be able to exaggerate their claims while staying within the bounds of government regulation. Whether and when the firm would choose to tell the truth in advertising in the presence of imperfect government monitoring is an interesting question for future research. Note also that in the absence of the truth-telling in advertising assumption, consumers may be more likely to search for information on their own and would consider the information obtained through their own search to be more credible. Second, we also assume that the consumer faces a discrete search decision-- she can either choose to search or choose not to search. Realistically, the decision is continuous--the amount of search will be affected by the uncertainty faced by the consumer along with the product price. We leave these for future research.
Finally, there can be other alternative explanations for the existence and effectiveness of nonattribute

advertising (in particular, image advertising). For instance, image advertising may be used to increase consumer trust. We do not wish to claim that our explanation is the only possible theory for this phenomenon. Nevertheless, we offer a novel explanation for nonattribute advertising as an invitation to search.

7. Electronic Companion
An electronic companion to this paper is available as part of the online version that can be found at http:// mktsci.pubs.informs.org/.

Acknowledgments The authors contributed equally, and their names are listed in alphabetical order. This paper will also appear in the Festschrift to Honor John D. C. Little. The authors thank two anonymous reviewers, the associate editor, and the editor for very constructive comments during the review process. They also thank Kyle Bagwell, Dirk Bergemann, Dave Godes, Rick Harbaugh, Yogesh Joshi, Dmitri Kuksov, David Miller, Martin Peitz, K. Sudhir, Duncan Simester, Birger Wernerfelt, and seminar participants at the Qualitative Marketing and Economics conference, the Summer Institute in Competitive Strategy conference at Berkeley, the John D. C. Little Festschrift conference, the Northeast Marketing Consortium at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Third Conference on the Economics of Advertising and Marketing, Yale Economic Theory Lunch, marketing seminars at Columbia University, Erasmus University, Korea University, Northwestern University, Syracuse University, Tilburg University, University of Maryland, University of Southern California, University of Texas at Austin, and Yale University for their helpful comments.

Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1. The consumer will search if and

only if E U search) = Pr s¯

EV

s¯ - p - c 

E U no search) = max 0 E V - p . Therefore,

(1) If E V

- p  0 then E U (search)  E U (no

search) iff

Pr s¯ E V s¯ - p - c  E V - p

 Pr s¯ E V s¯ - Pr s¯ p - c

 Pr s¯ E V s¯ + Pr s E V s - p

 c  Pr s p - E V s  g

(8)

(2) If E V -p < 0, then E U search  E U no search if

Pr s¯ E V s¯ - p - c  0

 c  Pr s¯ E V s¯ - p  f Next, we show that f = g at p = E V : f - g = Pr s¯ E V s¯ - p - Pr s p - E V

(9) s

= Pr s¯ E V s¯ - Pr s¯ p - Pr s p

+ Pr s E V s

= Pr s¯ E V s¯ + Pr s E V s - p

= E V -p=0

(10)

This completes the proof. Q.E.D.

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

681

D1 Refinement
We apply D1 (Fudenberg and Tirole 1991) to eliminate unreasonable out-of-equilibrium beliefs. Following Fudenberg and Tirole (1991, p. 452), we define  to be the equilibrium profit of type . We also define the set of mixed-strategy best responses of the consumer,
2 ( 2 = 21 22 23 = Pr purchase without search), Pr no purchase), Pr search ) to a deviation by the firm, A1 = a p , such that type strictly prefers A1 to the equilibrium strategy:

D A1 = 2  MBR A1 A1 s.t.

 < A1 2

H A1 + M A1 + L A1 = 1 (11)

Note that the consumer's best response depends on her belief, A1 = H A1 M A1 L A1 .
Similarly, we define a set of the consumer's best responses such that the firm is indifferent between deviating and playing the equilibrium strategy:

D0 A1 = 2  MBR A1 A1 s.t.

 = A1 2

H A1 + M A1 + L A1 = 1 (12)

The criterion D1 puts zero probability on type if there exists another type such that

D A1  D0 A1  D A1

(13)

Using Lemma 1, we derive the set of the consumer's mixed

best responses, MBR A1 A1 : 1. If E V A1 - p > 0, (a) The consumer will search: 2 = 0 0 1 , if
c < Pr s A1 p - E V A1 s . (b) The consumer will purchase without search: 2 =
1 0 0 , if c > Pr s A1 p - E V A1 s . (c) The consumer mixes between search and purchase

without search: 2 = 21 0 1 - 21 , if c = Pr s A1 · p - E V A1 s .
2. If E V A1 - p < 0, (a) The consumer will search: 2 = 0 0 1 , if
c < Pr s¯ A1 E V A1 s¯ - p . (b) The consumer will not purchase: 2 = 0 1 0 if
c > Pr s¯ A1 E V A1 s¯ - p . (c) The consumer mixes between search and no

purchase: 2 = 0 22 1 - 22 , if c = Pr s¯

A1 ·

E V A1 s¯ - p .

3. If E V

A1 - p = 0 and c = Pr s

A1 ·

E V A1 - E V A1 s , the consumer chooses either

2 = 0 22 1 - 22 or 2 = 21 0 1 - 21 .

Note that 2 = 21 1 - 21 0 MBR A1 A1 because

we assume that if the consumer is indifferent between pur-

chasing the product and no purchase, she chooses to pur-

chase it.

Bounds on Prices and Beliefs for Consumer Search Next, using the results above, we derive explicit bounds on prices and beliefs such that the consumer searches as a best response to A1.
Lemma 2.
1. Consider the case where the firm engages in attribute advertising, A1 = aj p , and the consumer's belief is

j= 0

j M

j H

.

There

exists

a

consumer

belief

under

which search is a best response for the consumer if c 

V¯ H - M /8 and p  pj p¯j , where

pj

=

3 4

V¯

-

V¯ 2/4 H - M 2 - 2V¯ c H - M V¯

2 H- M

2

p¯j

=

3 V¯ 4

+

V¯ 2/4

H - M 2 - 2V¯ c 2 H- M

H - M  V¯

Moreover, for a given

j H

consumer chooses to search iff

pj

j
H=

j H

1-

H V¯ + 1 -

j H

j H

1-

H

+

1-

1- M

j H

1-

V¯ /2
M

+c p



j H

H V¯ + 1 -

j H

j H

H + 1-

M j

V¯ /2

-c

= p¯j

HM

j H

2. Consider the case where the firm engages in

uninformative advertising, A1 = a0 p , and the con-

sumer's belief is

0=

00 LM

0 H

,

where

0 L



^L

=

1 2

1+

1 - 4c/ V¯

H- L

. There exists a consumer belief

( 0) under which search is a best response for the con-

sumer if c  V¯ H - L /4 and p  p0 p¯0 where p0 

min0

0 L



^

L

p0

0 L

Moreover, for a

 pj , p¯0 given


0

max0

0 L



^L

p¯0

the consumer

0 L

 p¯j .

chooses to

search

iff

p0

0=

0 H

1-

H V¯ +

0 M

1-

0 H

1-

H+

0 M

1-

M

M
+

V¯ /2 + c

0 L

1-

L

p



0 H

H V¯ +

0 H

H+

0 M 0 M

M V¯ /2

M+

0 L

- c = p¯0
L

0

Proof. See the electronic companion.

We can easily show that V¯ H - M /8 < V¯ H - L /4 since L < H and L < M . This of course implies that if c  V¯ H - M /8, there exists a belief under which the consumer chooses to search after observing aj and a0.

HL Equilibrium

Proof of Proposition 3. We show that HL equilibrium with consumer search exists if

c < V¯ H - M 8

1- 2-

H V¯ + 2c H- L



pH L

<

H V¯ - 2c H+ L

and

V¯ H pH L > 2 > M pH L

We first turn to the consumer's problem. As we can see from Lemma 2, for the consumer to search in equilibrium, it must be the case that c  V¯ H - M /8 and pHL  p0 L p¯0 L where

p¯0

L=

0 H

H V¯ +

0 M

M V¯ /2 - c

0 H

H+

0 M

M+

0 LL

and

p0

L=

0 H

1-

H V¯ +

0 M

1-

M

V¯ /2 + c

0 H

1-

H+

0 M

1-

M+

0 L

1-

L

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

682

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

In addition, on the equilibrium path, the probabilities that

the firm is H type and L type following

a0

pH L

are

1 2

and

1 2

(i.e.,

/2 / /2 + /2 and

/2 / /2 + /2 for H and L

types, respectively). Hence, p¯0

1 2

=

H V¯ - 2c / H + L >

1 2

V¯

and

p0

1 2

=

1 - H V¯ + 2c / 2 - H - L < V¯ /2 since

c  V¯ H - M /8. Hence, for the consumer to search in

equilibrium, the price must be in the appropriate range:

pH L 

1 - H V¯ + 2c 2- H - L

H V¯ - 2c H+ L

Next, we need to ensure that all types prefer their equilibrium strategy to an optimal deviation. To show existence, as we discuss in the body of the paper, we impose the following out-of-equilibrium belief: L = 1 for all a0 p = pH L and H = 0 for all aj p = V¯ /2 . Given the assumed out-ofequilibrium beliefs, the nondeviation conditions for the H type and M type, respectively, reduce to the following:

 a0 pH L q = H = H pH L > maxA1

V¯ A1 q = H = 2 (14)

V¯  aj pM q = M = 2 > maxA1 A1 q = M = M pH L

Finally, the L type, by definition, cannot deviate on advertising. A deviation on price only yields a maximum profit of 0 under the off-equilibrium beliefs. Hence,
 a0 pHL q = L = LpH L > 0 which is trivially satisfied. Therefore, as long as the condition

max 1 - H V¯ + 2c V¯ < min H V¯ - 2c V¯

2- H - L 2 H

H+ L 2 M

holds, we can always find p, which satisfies

1- 2-

H V¯ + 2c H- L



pH L

<

H V¯ - 2c H+ L

and

V¯ H pH L > 2 > M pH L Q.E.D. Proof of Proposition 4. We examine the restrictions on the out-of-equilibrium beliefs that are imposed by D1. First, we assume that pH L < V¯ / 2 M . We will return to this assumption below and confirm that it is indeed the case in equilibrium.

Lemma 3. Suppose that pH L < V¯ / 2 M . D1 imposes the fol-
lowing constraints on out-of-equilibrium beliefs:
1. Let p^  H - M p¯j + V¯ /2 1 - H / H 1 - M . If the consumer observes A1 = aj pdev ,
(a) when V¯ /2 < pdev < min H pH L pj , H A1 = 0; (b) if p^  pH L when pj  pdev  p¯j = min p^ p¯j , H A1 = 0; (c) if p^ > pH L, when max pj p^ < pdev  p¯j , H A1 = 1 2. If the consumer observes the deviation A1 = a0 pdev , (a) when LpH L < pdev < min H pH L p0 , H A1 = 0;
(b) when M pH L < V¯ /2, and max p0 LpH L < pdev < min pH L p¯0 , L A1 = 1;
(c) when M pH L < V¯ /2, and pH L < pdev < p¯0, M A1 = 0.

Proof. Let us first define the sets for = L M H :

D0 H A1 D H A1 = X^ H Y^H = 0 22 1- 22

pdev - pH L 22  pdev



21 0 1 - 21

H pH L - pdev 21  1 - H pdev

D0 M A1 D M A1

= X^ M Y^M = 0 22 1- 22

M pdev -V¯ /2

22 

M pdev



21 0 1 - 21

V¯ /2- M pdev 21  1 - M pdev

D0 L A1 D L A1

= X^ L Y^L = 0 22 1- 22

22



pdev - pH L pdev



21 0 1 - 21

21 

L pH L - pdev 1 - L pdev

1. Consider a deviation to a price such that the consumer
chooses not to purchase at any off-equilibrium belief: A1 = aj pdev , where pdev > p¯j ; or A1 = a0 pdev , where pdev > p¯0; i.e., 22 = 1 Here, D1 does not apply.
2. Next, consider a deviation to a price such that the
consumer chooses to purchase without search at any offequilibrium belief: A1 = aj pdev , where pdev < pj ; or A1 = a0 pdev , where pdev < p0; i.e., 21 = 1. Therefore, D1 imposes that H A1 = 0 if A1 = aj pdev for all V¯ /2  pdev < min H pH L pj . Similarly, if A1 = a0 pdev for all LpH L  pdev < min H pH L p0 , H A1 = 0
3. Consider A1 = aj pdev and pj  pdev  p¯j . First, we assume that

H-

M p¯j + V¯ /2 H 1- M

1-

H

 pH L

 p¯j  H 1 - M pH L - V¯ /2 1 - H H- M

If pdev < H 1 - M pH L - V¯ /2 1 - H / H - M , we can show, using simple calculus, that

H pH L - pdev 1 - H pdev

>

M pdev - V¯ /2 1 - M pdev

which implies that Y^H  YM . Also, we can see that H 1 - M pH L - V¯ /2 1 - H / H - M < pH L as long as
pH L < V¯ / 2 M . Hence, we have

pdev < H 1 - M pH L - V¯ /2 1 - H < pH L H- M

This, in turn, implies XM = X^ H = . Therefore, for

pj < pdev < min

H 1 - M pH L - V¯ /2 1 - H p¯j H- M

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

683

D1 constrains the belief to be H = 0 following A1. Of course, since p¯j  H 1 - M pH L - V¯ /2 1 - H / H - M for pj < pdev < p¯j , H = 0 following A1. Second, consider

H-

M p¯j + V¯ /2 H 1- M

1-

H

> pH L

 p¯j > H 1 - M pH L - V¯ /2 1 - H H- M

Then, there exists an interval such that

H 1 - M pH L - V¯ /2 1 - H  pdev < min p¯j pH L H- M
Using the same argument as in (a) above, we can show that here Y^M  YH , and XH = X^ M = . Hence, as long as
max pj H 1 - M pH L - V¯ /2 1 - H H- M
< pdev < min p¯j pH L
D1 constrains the belief to be H = 1 following A1 Next, consider pdev  pH L. We can see that when pH L < V¯ / 2 M ,
M pdev - V¯ /2 / M pdev < pdev - pH L /pdev < 1 which implies that X^ M  XH . Also, we know that in this region Y^M  YH . Hence, D1 implies that H = 1 following pdev, where max pH L pj < pdev < p¯j . In summary, D1 implies that for

max pj

H 1 - M pH L - V¯ /2 1 - H H- M

< pdev  p¯j

H =1 4. Consider A1 = a0 pdev = pH L and p0  pdev  p¯0. First, consider the case pdev < pH L, which implies that XH = XM = XL = Also, if pdev > LpH L

L pH L - pdev 1 - L pdev

<

H pH L - pdev 1 - H pdev

L pH L - pdev 1 - L pdev

<1

And if pdev < V¯ /2 1 - L - L 1 - M pH L M- L

L pH L - pdev 1 - L pdev

<

V¯ /2 - M pdev 1 - M pdev

Moreover, we can see that when

V¯ M pH L < 2

pH L < V¯ /2 1 - L - L 1 - M pH L M- L

Hence, when M pH L < V¯ /2, Y^H  YL and Y^M  YL if max p0 LpH L < pdev < min pH L p¯0 , which implies that D1 constrains the belief to be L = 1 following A1 = a0 pdev Second, consider the case pdev > pH L, which implies that X^ H = X^ L = and YH = YL =  21  0 1 Also, if

V¯ M pH L < 2

M pdev - V¯ /2 1 - M pdev

<

pdev - pH L pdev

which implies that X^ M  XL and X^ M  XH Hence, D0 M A1  D M A1  D L A1 and D0 M A1  D M A1  D H A1 which implies that D1 constraints the belief to be M = 0 following A1 = a0 pdev

Given the out-of-equilibrium beliefs that are consis-
tent with D1, if pH L < H - M /p¯j + V¯ /2 1 - H / H 1 - M , there always exists a profitable deviation
under D1. To show this, consider A1 = aj pdev , where H 1 - M pH L - V¯ /2 1 - H / H - M < pdev  p¯j Based on Lemma 3, 1(c), H = 1: the consumer buys the
product without search. Both H and M types prefer to devi-
ate to A1, which, in turn, destroys this equilibrium. Hence, for the HL equilibrium to exist, it must be the case that
H - M p¯j + V¯ /2 1 - H / H 1 - M  pH L When

H-

M p¯j + V¯ /2 H 1- M

1-

H

V¯ < pH L < 2 M

one example of an off-equilibrium belief that is consistent
with the properties described above is L = 1 for all a0 p = pH L and H = 0 for all aj p = V¯ /2 . This is the belief that we assume to demonstrate existence below.
From Equation (14) in the proof of Proposition 3 above
and the search condition that

pH L 

1 - H V¯ + 2c 2- H - L

H V¯ - 2c H+ L

as well as the condition from D1, H - M p¯j + V¯ /2 · 1 - H / H 1 - M  pH L we can see that the equilibrium price must be

V¯ max

1 - H V¯ + 2c

2 H 2- H - L

H - M p¯j + V¯ /2 1 - H H 1- M

 pH L < min

H V¯ - 2c V¯ H+ L 2 M

Also note that

1 - H V¯ + 2c < V¯ < V¯

2- H - L

2 2H

Moreover, we can see that p¯j  V¯ /2 implies that

V¯

H - M p¯j + V¯ /2 1 - H

2 H

H 1- M

This reduces the price condition for the existence of the HL equilibrium under D1 to the following:

H-

M p¯j + V¯ /2 1 - H 1- M

H

 pH L < min

Hence, as long as the condition

H V¯ - 2c V¯ H+ L 2 M

H - M p¯j + V¯ /2 1- H < min H V¯ -2c V¯

H 1- M

H+ L 2 M

holds, we can always find pH L, which satisfies the above conditions. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 6. The first condition ensures that HL exists (see Proposition 4). The remaining equilibria that survive the D1 refinement are HM with search and HML with search (see Proposition 5).

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

684

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

We first turn to HM. Note that for the consumer to
search in equilibrium, pH M  p¯HM when c < V¯ /2 1 - · H - M , where p¯HM = H V¯ + M 1 - V¯ - c / H + M 1 -  p¯j (see the proof of Proposition 5
in the electronic companion). Suppose that M p¯HM < V¯ /2, which of course implies that M pH M < V¯ /2. Consider a deviation by M to A1 = aj pdev = V¯ /2 . The consumer is willing to purchase the product with no additional search (see
Lemma 2). This implies that M prefers to deviate, which
destroys this equilibrium. Hence, we demonstrated that
HM does not exist if M p¯HM < V¯ /2. Next, for the consumer to search in HML equilibrium,
pH ML  p¯H0 ML, where

p¯H0 ML = p¯0

=

H V¯ + 1 - M V¯ - 2c H + L +2 1- M

(see the proof of Proposition 5 in the electronic compan-
ion). Similarly, we can show that HML does not exist if M p¯H0 ML < V¯ /2. Therefore, HM and HML do not exist if M max p¯H0 ML p¯HM < V¯ /2. Finally, using algebra, we can
show that p¯HM > p¯H0 ML, which reduces the sufficient "nonexistence" condition to M p¯HM < V¯ /2. To demonstrate that this region is nonempty, consider the following example: H = 0 9, M = 0 5, L = 0 1, V¯ = 100, c = 5, = 2/3, and pH L = 77 491 80 . Here, HL is the only equilibrium that survives
D1. Q.E.D.

References
Abernethy, A. M., D. D. Butler. 1992. Advertising information: Services versus products. J. Retailing 68(4) 398­419.
Anand, B. N., R. Shachar. 2007. (Noisy) communication. Quant. Marketing Econom. 5(3) 211­237.
Anand, B. N., R. Shachar. 2009. Targeted advertising as a signal. Quant. Marketing Econom. 7(3) 237­266.
Anderson, S. P., R. Renault. 2006. Advertising content. Amer. Econom. Rev. 96(1) 93­113.
Araujo, A., D. Gottlieb, H. Moreira. 2007. A model of mixed signals with applications to countersignaling. RAND J. Econom. 38(4) 1020­1043.
Bagwell, K. 2007. The economic analysis of advertising. M. Armstrong, R. H. Porter, eds. Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 3. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1701­1844.
Bagwell, K., G. Ramey. 1994. Advertising and coordination. Rev. Econom. Stud. 61(1) 153­171.
Bhardwaj, P., Y. Chen, D. Godes. 2008. Buyer-initiated vs. seller-initiated information revelation. Management Sci. 54(6) 1104­1114.
Butters, G. R. 1977. Equilibrium distributions of sales and advertising prices. Rev. Econom. Stud. 44(3) 465­491.
Carpenter, G. S., R. Glazer, K. Nakamoto. 1994. Meaningful brands from meaningless differentiation: The dependence on irrelevant attributes. J. Marketing Res. 31(3) 339­350.
Chen, Y., J. Xie. 2008. Online consumer review: Word-of-mouth as a new element of marketing communication mix. Management Sci. 54(3) 477­491.
Chevalier, J. A., D. Mayzlin. 2006. The effect of word of mouth on sales: Online book reviews. J. Marketing Res. 43(3) 345­354.
Cho, I.-K., D. M. Kreps. 1987. Signaling games and stable equilibria. Quart. J. Econom. 102(2) 179­221.
Desai, P. S., K. Srinivasan. 1995. Demand signalling under unobservable effort in franchising: Linear and nonlinear price contracts. Management Sci. 41(10) 1608­1623.

Feltovich, N., R. Harbaugh, T. To. 2002. Too cool for school? Signalling and countersignalling. RAND J. Econom. 33(4) 630­649.
Fudenberg, D., J. Tirole. 1991. Game Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Godes, D., D. Mayzlin. 2004. Using online conversations to study word-of-mouth communication. Marketing Sci. 23(4) 545­560.
Grossman, G. M., C. Shapiro. 1984. Informative advertising with differentiated products. Rev. Econom. Stud. 51(1) 63­81.
Harbaugh, R., T. To. 2008. False modesty: When disclosing good news looks bad, Working paper, Indiana University, Bloomington.
Hertzendorf, M. N. 1993. I'm not a high-quality firm--But I play one on TV. RAND J. Econom. 24(2) 236­247.
Holbrook, M. B., J. O'Shaughnessy. 1984. The role of emotion in advertising. Psych. Marketing 1(2) 45­64.
Hvide, H. K. 2003. Education and the allocation of talent. J. Labor Econom. 21(4) 945­976.
Janssen, M. C., M. C. Non. 2009. Going where the ad leads you: On high advertised prices and searching where to buy. Marketing Sci. 28(1) 87­98.
J.D. Power and Associates. 2010. Overall customer satisfaction with credit cards rebounds slightly from 2009, but loyalty continues to decline. Press release (August 19), http:// businesscenter.jdpower.com/news/pressrelease.aspx?ID =2010159.
Kardes, F. R. 2005. The psychology of advertising. T. C. Brock, M. C. Green, eds. Persuasion: Psychological Insights and Perspectives. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, 281­303.
Kihlstrom, R. E., M. H. Riordan. 1984. Advertising as a signal. J. Political Econom. 92(3) 427­450.
Kuksov, D. 2007. Brand value in social interaction. Management Sci. 53(10) 1634­1644.
Lauga, D. O. 2010. Persuasive advertising with sophisticated but impressionable consumers. Working paper, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla.
Mayzlin, D. 2006. Promotional chat on the Internet. Marketing Sci. 25(2) 155­163.
McAfee, R. P., M. Schwartz. 1994. Opportunism in multilateral vertical contracting: Nondiscrimination, exclusivity, and uniformity. Amer. Econom. Rev. 84(1) 210­230.
Meurer, M., D. O. Stahl II. 1994. Informative advertising and product match. Internat. J. Indust. Organ. 12(1) 1­19.
Milgrom, P. R. 1981. Good news and bad news: Representation theorems and applications. Bell J. Econom. 12(2) 380­391.
Milgrom, P., J. Roberts. 1986. Price and advertising signals of product quality. J. Political Econom. 94(4) 796­821.
Moorthy, S., K. Srinivasan. 1995. Signaling quality with a moneyback guarantee: The role of transaction costs. Marketing Sci. 14(4) 442­466.
Nelson, P., 1974. Advertising as information. J. Political Econom. 82(4) 311­329.
Phillips, D. J., E. W. Zuckerman. 2001. Middle-status conformity: Theoretical restatement and empirical demonstration in two markets. Amer. J. Sociol. 107(2) 379­429.
Schmalensee, R. 1978. A model of advertising and product quality. J. Political Econom. 86(3) 485­503.
Scott, L. M. 1994. Images in advertising: The need for a theory of visual rhetoric. J. Consumer Res. 21(2) 252­273.
Shapiro, J. M. 2006. A "memory-jamming" theory of advertising. Working paper, University of Chicago, Chicago.
Shin, J. 2005. The role of selling costs in signaling price image. J. Marketing Res. 42(3) 302­312.
Simester, D. 1995. Signalling price image using advertised prices. Marketing Sci. 14(2) 166­188.

Mayzlin and Shin: Uninformative Advertising as an Invitation to Search

Marketing Science 30(4), pp. 666­685, © 2011 INFORMS

685

Sun, M. 2011. Disclosing multiple product attributes. J. Econom. Management Strategy 20(1) 195­224.
Teoh, S. H., C. Y. Hwang. 1991. Nondisclosure and adverse disclosure as signals of firm value. Rev. Financial Stud. 4(2) 283­313.
Tirole, J. 1986. Hierarchies and bureaucracies: On the role of collusion in organizations. J. Law, Econom., Organ. 2(2) 181­214.
Tirole, J. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Wernerfelt, B. 1988. Umbrella branding as a signal of new product quality: An example of signalling by posting a bond. RAND J. Econom. 19(3) 458­466.
Wernerfelt, B. 1994. On the function of sales assistance. Marketing Sci. 13(1) 68­82.
Yoganarasimhan, H. 2009. Cloak or flaunt? The firm's fashion dilemma. Working paper, University of California, Davis, Davis.

