Vol. 28, No. 6, November­December 2009, pp. 1112­1128 issn 0732-2399 eissn 1526-548X 09 2806 1112

informs ®
doi 10.1287/mksc.1090.0514 © 2009 INFORMS

Business Models for Media Firms: Does Competition Matter for How They Raise Revenue?

Hans Jarle Kind
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration, N-5038 Bergen, Norway, hans.kind@nhh.no
Tore Nilssen
University of Oslo, N-0317 Oslo, Norway, tore.nilssen@econ.uio.no
Lars Sørgard
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration, N-5038 Bergen, Norway, lars.sorgard@nhh.no
The purpose of this article is to analyze how competitive forces may influence the way media firms like TV channels raise revenue. A media firm can either be financed by advertising revenue, by direct payment from the viewers (or the readers, if we consider newspapers), or by both. We show that the scope for raising revenues from consumer payment is constrained by other media firms offering close substitutes. This implies that the less differentiated the media firms' content, the larger is the fraction of their revenue coming from advertising. A media firm's scope for raising revenues from ads, on the other hand, is constrained by how many competitors it faces. We should thus expect that direct payment from the media consumers becomes more important the larger the number of competing media products.
Key words: advertising; media economics; pricing History: Received: July 31, 2008; accepted: April 27, 2009; processed by Miklos Sarvary. Published online in
Articles in Advance August 26, 2009.

1. Introduction
In December 2005, after years of planning and months of testing, CNN launched its Pipeline service, where viewers could subscribe to live breaking news online at a price of $24.95 a year ($2.95 a month, or $0.99 a day). One and a half years later, CNN removed its subscription fee on Pipeline and replaced it with a free ad-supported service.1 In September 2005, the New York Times introduced TimesSelect, which charged $49.95 a year or $7.95 a month for online access to its columnists and news archive. Two years later, the fee was removed. Vivian L. Schiller, general manager of the site, explained the change in strategy as follows: "Our projections for growth on that paid subscriber base were low, compared to the growth of online advertising" (New York Times 2007). These, and many other examples, indicate that business models with revenues from subscription fees have become increasingly less viable on the Internet. However, in the traditional TV industry we observe the opposite trend. In 2003, subscription revenues were larger than advertising revenues for the first time in the UK TV
1 See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CNN_Pipeline.

market (Ofcom 2005). By 2007, the same was true in the United States.2
How can we explain that financing seems to shift from subscription to advertising in one media market and in the opposite direction in another media market? The purpose of this article is to introduce a theory that can help us to resolve this puzzle. We show that competition and strategic interactions between media firms may be decisive for their choice of financing. To capture the role of competition, we allow both the degree of content differentiation between the media firms' products and the number of media firms to vary (e.g., the number of newspapers or TV channels). It turns out that these two competitive forces are qualitatively different. On the one hand, the scope for raising revenues from consumer payment is constrained by other media firms offering close substitutes. On the other hand, the scope for
2 According to TNS Media Intelligence, the revenues from advertising on TV in the United States rose from $54.4 billion in 2003 to $63.8 billion in 2007; see, for example, http://www. tns-mi.com/news/03252008.htm concerning the figures for 2007. The revenues from subscriptions and license fees increased from $49.5 billion in 2003 to $66.6 billion in 2007 according to PwC (see http://www.marketingcharts.com/television/ global-entertainment-media-to-reach-22t-in-2012-driven-by-digitalmobile-5012/pwc-outlook-global-tv-subscription-license-fee-marketby-regionjpg/).

1112

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

1113

raising revenues from ads is constrained by the number of media firms.
To understand our results, consider two or more TV channels that are so differentiated that they have (close to) monopoly power in their own viewer segments. This market power can be utilized to set high consumer prices. However, if the differentiation between the TV channels is reduced, each will have incentives to lower its consumer price to attract viewers from its rivals (demand becomes more elastic). Better substitutability between the channels thereby puts a downward pressure on viewer charges. In actuality, the channels will not be able to set consumer prices higher than marginal costs if the viewers perceive the channels as perfect substitutes (and the firms have equal marginal costs). We therefore arrive at the standard textbook result that revenue from consumer payments is monotonically decreasing in the substitutability between the products.
The same is not true with regard to revenue from the advertising market. The reason is that when consumers dislike advertising, competition in advertising prices is distinctively different from competition in consumer prices. As we should expect from more traditional markets, a firm that lowers its advertising price will sell more advertising space. However, because advertising on the margin is a nuisance for the audience, this will make the other media firms' products more attractive for the consumers. All else equal, media firms will consequently be reluctant to compete by setting low advertising prices. More technically, we show that it is a fundamental characteristic of the media market that advertising prices are strategic substitutes and consumer prices are strategic complements. From the literature it is well known that competition is tougher on strategic complements than on strategic substitutes. Contrary to what is the case with consumer payments, a smaller channel differentiation will therefore not reduce advertising revenue. Indeed, we show that the opposite is true; the less differentiated the media products are from the audience' point of view, the higher the revenue is from advertising.
Next, suppose that the number of TV channels increases. The viewers will then be spread over a larger number of channels. This, in turn, reduces any individual TV channel's market power in the advertising market. As the number of TV channels increases, the price each can charge for ads approaches marginal costs. However, if the consumers consider the new channels as different from those which are already in the market, each channel will still have some market power in the viewer market and will therefore always be able to make a positive profit from direct consumer payments. Our model thereby predicts that consumer

payments are relatively more important as a source of revenue the greater the number of TV channels.
Our predictions are consistent with casual observations from several media markets. The total number of printed newspapers has gone down the last couple of decades, while at the same time we have witnessed an increase in the number of purely advertisingfinanced newspapers. This indicates that a reduction in the number of printed newspapers has led to a larger fraction of their revenues being generated by advertising.3 In the TV market we observe the opposite. The number of commercial TV channels has increased, and direct payments from the viewers have become more and more important relative to advertising revenues. Casual observations also indicate that the newspapers and TV channels that are most differentiated from their rivals are the ones that are best able to charge the consumers. This is most obvious on the Internet; a high reliance on ad revenue seems to be the only viable business model for electronic newspapers that cannot offer unique content.
Finally, our model predicts that media products that are mainly advertising financed have relatively large audiences. Again, competition is the driving force. To see why, note that media products that the consumers perceive to be good substitutes will have low market power. Such media products must therefore be sold on relatively favorable terms to the consumers. Thus, the size of the audience increases. This is not because the media firms seek a broad audience as such, but because the competitive pressure forces them to behave so that they attract a larger audience. This prediction is consistent with the observation that pay-TV channels and newspapers with few close substitutes typically have high prices and small audiences.
Several studies of the media industry focus on program scheduling and, in particular, on the wellknown "lead-in" effect (see, e.g., Rust and Eechambadi 1989, Shachar and Emerson 2000).4 Other studies are concerned with the choice of programming, i.e., what programs to produce (see, e.g., Liu et al. 2004).5 However, none of these studies models the choice of
3 As pointed out by one of the referees, the drop in the number of printed newspapers might be due to a negative demand shock on the reader side of the market.
4 Lead-in refers to TV stations that air popular programs early in the evening to attract viewers who then continue to watch their channels for the rest of the evening. This topic is also studied in Goettler and Shachar (2001) and Rust and Alpert (1984). See also Nilssen and Sørgard (1998), where the program scheduling of news for two competing TV channels is analyzed.
5 For a debate concerning their results, see Chou and Wu (2006) and Liu et al. (2006). Programming has been an issue in the mediaeconomics literature for a long time; see, for example, Steiner (1952), Beebe (1977), and Spence and Owen (1977).

1114

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

advertising by media firms. More recently, there have been some studies that analyze advertising decisions by media firms.6 The choice of financing--advertising versus direct payment--has not been an issue in any of these articles.
The only paper we are aware of, besides our own, that considers media firms financed partly by advertising and partly by consumer payments, is Godes et al. (2009).7 One of the novelties of their work is to analyze competition between firms in different media industries, for instance, between a newspaper and a TV channel, an issue not raised here. They also analyze duopolistic competition between media firms in the same industry, highlighting the impact of competition on media firms' incentives to underprice (e.g., to sell newspapers at prices below marginal costs in order to attract readers and earn higher advertising revenue). In contrast, we provide a systematic discussion of how competition affects media firms' sources of revenue by distinguishing between product differentiation in the content market and the number of firms as sources of increased competition. The model of Godes et al. (2009) is not equally suitable for this exercise, because they use a framework where the equilibrium advertising level is independent of the competitive pressure on the consumer side, and they limit their analysis to monopoly and duopoly. Besides, they do not have a unique measure of the differentiation between media products.
We would like to emphasize that our analysis should not be confused with the standard theory of two goods being complements in consumption. Complements are used to describe a situation where an increase in the price of one good causes a consumer to reduce consumption of both goods, as measured by the change in his or her compensated demand (see, e.g., Kreps 1990, p. 61). A two-sided market, in contrast, consists of two distinct groups of customers, and the groups may respond differently to changes in output on the other side of the market (see Rochet and Tirole 2003, 2006 for a general discussion). The price of a newspaper, for instance, is irrelevant for advertisers per se, as are advertising prices for the readers. However, to the extent that a higher newspaper price translates into reduced sales of newspapers, demand for ads will typically fall. A lower advertising volume (e.g., because of higher advertising prices), on the other hand, increases demand for newspapers if the readers perceive ads as a bad.
6 See Dukes and Gal-Or (2003), Barros et al. (2004), Gabszewicz et al. (2004b), Anderson and Coate (2005), Gal-Or and Dukes (2006), and Kind et al. (2007).
7 Peitz and Valletti (2008) analyze competition between pay-TV and pure free-to-air TV in a setting where they assume that the latter cannot charge the viewers.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In §2 we present our model, and we report our equilibrium outcomes in §3. In §4 we analyze how competition affects the media firms' source of financing. We first show that although price competition is a harsh form of competition in the consumer market, it is relatively weak in the advertising market. Second, we discuss the role of product differentiation and the number of firms in explaining the financing of media firms. In §5 we provide some empirical examples that illustrate how the competitive forces at work in our model play out in specific cases. Finally, in §6, we conclude and discuss the managerial implications of our results.

2. The Model
We consider a media industry where the media firms choose to earn revenue solely from the advertising market (traditional free-to-air TV and free newspapers), solely from consumer payments (e.g., pure pay-TV), or from a combination of these two sources. There are m  2 competing media firms, and each media firm is offering one media product. The advertising level in media product i = 1 m is denoted Ai, and consumer demand is denoted Ci. The advertisers and consumers are charged unit prices equal to ri and pi, respectively. We disregard any production costs such that the profit level of media firm i is

i = piCi + riAi i = 1

m

(1)

We follow Kind et al. (2007) in assuming that consumer preferences are given by the following quadratic utility function:

m

m

m

2

U=

Ci

-

1 2

m 1-s

Ci 2 + s

Ci

(2)

i=1

i=1

i=1

The parameter s  0 1 is a measure of product differentiation; the higher s, the closer substitutes the media products are from the consumers' point of view (and the higher is the elasticity of substitution between any pair of goods). We normalize the population size to one and may thus interpret Ci as, for example, both the time that each viewer spends watching channel i and as the number of viewers of channel i.
The specification in (2) is due to Shubik and Levitan (1980) and is a modification of the standard quadratic utility function (SQU). The reason why we use the modified version is that the SQU poses two problems that make it less suitable for our purpose. First, under SQU a change in the parameter s would affect both the substitutability between the goods and the size of the market. Second, the elasticity of substitution would depend on both s and m, making comparative statics with respect to those

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS
two parameters problematic. These problems are not present in the Shubik-Levitan utility function; with such consumer preferences the size of the market is independent of s, and the elasticity of substitution between any pair of goods is independent of m (for any given prices).8 This is important in the present paper because our main contribution is to show why a higher substitutability between media products could make media firms more dependent on advertising revenue, whereas an increase in the number of media products has the opposite effect. We thus need a utility function where it is possible to isolate the effects of changing s and m, respectively; however, we believe that our qualitative results are robust to the exact specification of the consumer preferences.9
Consumer surplus depends on the price pi that the consumers are charged for the media product (e.g., per copy of a newspaper). In addition, consumer surplus depends on the level of advertising, unless the consumers are indifferent to ads. To capture this dependency, we let the subjective consumer cost for each unit consumed of media product i be pi + iAi , where i measures the consumers' disutility of the ads. Consumer surplus is thus given by
m
CS = U - pi + iAi Ci
i=1
This formulation implies that a consumer's disutility from ads in a given media product is higher the more he consumes of that media product. This captures the notion that increased consumption of a media product also exposes the consumer to more of the advertising that the media product carries.
In principle, the parameter i might itself be a function of the advertising level in media product i. We could for instance assume that consumers have positive utility of ads ( i < 0) for relatively small advertising levels (e.g., because ads inform newspaper readers about retail prices at local stores), but that they perceive ads to be a nuisance if the advertising level becomes sufficiently large. In the former case,
iAi may be perceived as a negative indirect price for media product i, and in the latter case, it may be perceived as a positive indirect price. For the majority of media products, it is reasonable to assume that
8 The Shubik-Levitan utility function has consequently been applied in studies where the number of products varies. See Davidson and Deneckere (1985) and Shaffer (1991) for two specific applications, and Motta (2004) for a general discussion of the virtues of the Shubik-Levitan utility function over SQU.
9 In an appendix available upon request, we show a possible way of reinterpreting the parameters under SQU such that the elasticity of substitution between the goods is independent of m and where our main results hold for m  3.

1115

consumers perceive ads as a bad on the margin.10
To highlight the fact that the media firms' choice of
direct prices (pi) and indirect prices ( iAi) depends crucially on the competitive pressure, we let i be positive and constant and with the same value for each
media product in the industry we consider; i   i. By setting CS/ Ci = 0, we then find that consumer demand for media product i equals

1 Ci = m 1 -

Ai - sA¯ - pi - sp¯ 1-s 1-s

i=1

m (3)

where A¯ = 1/m

m j =1

Aj

is

the

average

level

of

adver-

tising in the m media products, and p¯ = 1/m

m j =1

pj

is the average (direct) consumer price. Demand for

media product i is thus decreasing in its own price

and advertising level, and increasing in those of its

rivals if s > 0. This reflects the fact that the con-

sumers then perceive the media products as (imper-

fect) substitutes.

Note that Ci/ Ai = Ci/ pi < 0; other things being equal, sales of media product i fall by the

same amount whether the indirect price ( Ai) or the direct price (pi) increases by one unit. We nevertheless show that increased competition between media

firms affects their choices of direct and indirect prices

qualitatively differently. Without loss of generality,

we choose the unit size of advertising Ai such that we can put = 1.

The media firms can raise advertising revenue by

selling advertising space to producers of consumer

goods. There are n potential advertisers, and we let

Aki  0 denote producer k's advertising level in media product i. A producer's gross gain from advertising

is naturally increasing in its advertising level and

in the number of media consumers exposed to its

advertising. In particular, the benefit to an advertiser

from a marginal increase in its advertising level in

a given media product should be larger the more

consumers that media firm has. Similarly, the bene-

fit to the advertiser from increased consumption of a

media product should be greater the more advertis-

ing he has in that media product. We catch this inter-

action between the levels of advertising and media

consumption in the simplest possible way by assum-

ing that advertiser k's gross gain from advertising in

media product i equals AkiCi, where > 0 measures

10 It is well documented that viewers try to avoid advertising breaks on TV; see Moriarty and Everett (1994), Danaher (1995), and Wilbur (2008). For printed media, there are less clear answers as to whether consumers consider advertising as a good or a bad; see, e.g., Gabszewicz et al. (2004a) and Depken and Wilson (2004). Note that this is not inconsistent with our assumption that on the margin, consumers dislike advertising.

1116

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

the strength of the advertiser's benefit from advertising. This implies that the net gain for advertiser k from advertising in the m media product equals

m

m

k=

AkiCi -

Aki ri

i=1

i=1

k=1

n (4)

Below, we consider a three-stage game. At stage 1, the media firms noncooperatively set advertising prices (ri) and consumer prices (pi). At stage 2, the advertisers choose how much advertising space to buy. At stage 3, the consumers decide how much to buy of each media product.
We solve the game by backward induction and the solution to the final stage is given by Equation (3). Proceeding to the second stage, the first-order condition for the advertising level of advertiser k = 1 n in media product i can be written as

k
Aki

=

0



Ci +

Aki

Ci Aki

+

j =i

Akj

Cj Aki

= ri

(5)

Solving k/ Aki = 0 simultaneously for k = 1 n and i = 1 m, we find a unique equilib-
rium where Aki = Ai/n and Akj = Aj /n. This allows us to rewrite the equilibrium characterization in (5) as

Ci + n

Ai

Ci Aki

+

j =i

Aj

Cj Aki

= ri

(6)

To see the intuition for (6), suppose first that n  , so that ri  Ci. In the limit, as n approaches infinity, an advertiser's willingness to pay for an extra ad in media product i is thus proportional to the consumption level of that media product. However, in general, each advertiser must take into account the fact that by increasing the advertising level in media product i, that media product will become less attractive for the consumers (because the consumers dislike ads) and the other media products will become more attractive. These effects are captured by the terms Ci/ Aki < 0 and Cj / Aki > 0 in the brackets of (5) and (6), but they are weaker the smaller each advertiser's share of total advertising in the media products is (and vanish in the limit as n  ).
Using (3) and (6) we find that demand for advertising in media product i equals

Ai

=

n

n +

1

m

1 - pi

- m

1-s

ri - sr¯

i = 1 m (7)

where r¯ = 1/m

m j =1

rj

is

the

average

advertising

price at the m outlets.

Equation (7) shows that advertising demand at each

outlet is decreasing in its own price: Ai/ ri < 0. Interestingly, it is also decreasing in the other firms' adver-

tising prices: Ai/ rj < 0, j = i. To see the intuition for

this, suppose that the advertising price in one of the media products increases. That media product will then contain less advertising, thereby attracting media consumers from the other firms, which consequently will observe smaller demand for advertising.
Media consumers and advertisers constitute two different groups of customers (this is one reason why the analysis of two-sided markets differs from that of complementary goods, as noted in §1). Other things being equal, the advertising price ri is thus irrelevant for the media consumers, as is the consumer price pi for the advertisers. Equation (7) nonetheless shows that advertising demand at media firm i is decreasing in its consumer price; Ai/ pi < 0. However, this is an indirect effect, which follows from consumers having downward-sloping demand for each media product: a higher pi reduces consumption of media product i, making it less interesting to advertise in this product.

2.1. The Nature of Competition An important insight from the model is that competition in advertising prices is qualitatively different from competition in consumer prices. This difference is nicely spelled out by use of the notions of strategic substitutes and strategic complements due to Bulow et al. (1985). In essence, firms' strategic variables are strategic substitutes if an increase in one firm's variable entails a decrease in the other firms' variables, whereas they are strategic complements if an increase in one firm's variable entails an increase also in the other firms' variables; see, e.g., Vives (1999) for further discussion. We have
Lemma 1. Advertising prices are strategic substitutes, whereas consumer prices are strategic complements.
Proof. By inserting for (3) and (7) into (1), we have

d2 i = - n s < 0  j = i

dri drj

n+1

and

d2 i dpi dpj

=

1 n+1

1 m2

s 1-s

>0

j =i

Q.E.D.

Lemma 1 shows that there is a fundamental difference between the two markets in which the media firms operate. In the consumer market, an increase in one firm's price would provide the other firms with incentives to increase their prices too. This is in accordance with the normal textbook depiction of price competition. As argued above, things are quite different in the advertising market. If media firm i sets a higher advertising price, it will naturally sell less advertising. However, because advertising is a nuisance to consumers, consumer demand for media

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS
product i will increase while consumer demand for rival media products will fall. The rivals will consequently experience a smaller demand for advertising and thus have incentives to lower their advertising prices. This effect seems to be relatively robust, as it appears in a number of different frameworks; see, e.g., Nilssen and Sørgard (2001) and Gabszewicz et al. (2004b).
It could be argued that it is more reasonable to assume that media firms set advertising quantities rather than advertising prices. First, media firms can presumably, and relatively easily, decide how much space to allocate to commercials. Godes et al. (2009), who analyze competition in advertising quantities, provide some examples where media firms signal that their advertising volume will be relatively low. Second, media firms may plan in terms of quantities, for example, how many pages of advertising there should be in a newspaper and how often a television program should be interrupted by commercials.
In practice, however, there are no strict physical limits to how much space media firms can use for advertising. Separate leaflets can, for example, easily be included in newspapers and thereby increase the space for ads quite substantially. Another example is that TV channels can replace tune-ins with ads to expand the volume of commercials (or vice versa). Thus, the firms need to communicate possibly selfimposed quantity limits to the market, but what we typically observe is the announcement of advertising prices only; it is not common for printed newspapers to commit to a maximum number of pages with advertising, or for TV channels to commit to a maximum amount of time for commercials per day. Nor do we observe that advertisers pay a lower price the more advertising there is in a media product, which could be an indirect way of committing to a low advertising volume. Instead, the advertising-price scheme is based on, for instance, the size of the audience and the number of minutes the commercial of a given advertiser is shown.
What if the media firms were able to compete in advertising quantities instead of advertising prices; i.e., if, in contrast to our argumentation, they could make credible ad quantity commitments? Then they would compete in strategic complements also on the advertising side of the market. However, because this is harsher than competition in strategic substitutes, they have--not surprisingly--no incentives to make such commitments (see the appendix for a proof with m = 2). On the contrary, it is a dominant strategy for each firm to compete in advertising prices. This indicates that not only would it be difficult to commit to setting quantities; it would also be unprofitable. In line with this, we find it reasonable to assume that the media firms set prices on advertising.

1117

3. Equilibrium
The outcome of the two last stages of the game is given by Equations (3) and (7), and we are now ready to find the solution to the first stage. To simplify the algebra we make the following assumption:

Assumption 1. Let = 1.

The consequences of relaxing this assumption are discussed below.
At stage 1, each media firm sets its two prices; one for advertisers and one for consumers. Solving
i/ pi = i/ ri = 0 simultaneously for the m media firms, subject to consumer demand in (3) and advertising demand in (7), gives rise to a unique, symmetric equilibrium. By setting ri = r and pi = p  i, we find

r=

m

1 2-s

+s

(8)

p= m 1-s

(9)

m 2-s -s

Let A and C denote advertising and consumption levels, respectively, at each media firm in the symmetric equilibrium. Inserting from (8) and (9) into (3) and (7) yields

A = n s2

m-1

(10)

n+1 m 2-s -s m 2-s +s

m - s m 2 - s + s - n/ n + 1 s2 m - 1

C=

(11)

m m 2-s -s m 2-s +s

Equilibrium profit for each media firm can now be shown to equal

= s3

m-1

2

2-s n/ n+1 m 2-s +s

+ 1-s m-s 2 m 2-s -s 2

m

2-s

+s

2

(12)

From (10)­(12) we can now easily verify the following result:

Lemma 2. A larger number of advertisers (higher n) leads to
(i) more advertising (dA/dn > 0), (ii) reduction in output of each media product (dC/dn < 0), and (iii) higher profits for each media firm (d /dn > 0).

A larger number of advertisers implies that the demand for ads increases. This leads to a higher advertising volume in equilibrium such that consumption of each media product falls. Despite this, the media firms earn higher profits. The reason is that the increase in revenues from ads is greater than the reduction in revenues from consumer payment.

1118

4. Competition and Sources of Revenue
The parameters s and m can be interpreted as measures of competition among the TV stations. If s increases, competition becomes tougher because the media products are less differentiated, whereas an increase in m implies that competition becomes tougher due to a larger number of media firms. It is therefore not surprising that each media firm's profit is decreasing in both of these parameters (d /ds < 0 and d /dm < 0; see the appendix for a proof). However, the relative importance of advertising revenue compared to consumer payments depends crucially on whether competition increases because of an increase in s or in m. To see this, it is useful first to define S as the share of consumer payments in each media firm's total revenue:

S = pC

(13)

pC + rA

The algebra becomes quite complex if we have an arbitrary number of advertisers. In the main text we shall therefore focus on the limit case where n approaches infinity:

Assumption 2. Let n  .

Assumption 2 de facto implies that the advertisers are price takers in the advertising market (they take ri as given). It further implies that each advertiser's advertising volume is so small that he rationally disregards the possibility that his advertising volume has any effect on the attractiveness of each media product. We believe that the latter is a reasonable approximation for most advertisers in most media markets. In the appendix we nonetheless show that Assumption 2 does not significantly affect our main results.
Inserting for (8)­(11) into (13) and taking the limit value as n  , the share of consumer payments in each media firm's total revenue can be written as

S=

1-s m m 2-s +s m 1-s +s m 2-s -s

(14)

4.1. The Role of Product Differentiation Lemma 1 showed that consumer payments are strategic complements and advertising prices are strategic substitutes. This has important implications for how competition between media firms works. Competition in strategic complements is more aggressive than competition in strategic substitutes and more so the less differentiated the services are (see, e.g., Bulow et al. 1985, Vives 1999). Intuitively, we should therefore expect the media firms to rely more on advertising revenue and less on consumer payments the closer substitutes the consumers perceive the media products to be (the higher is s).

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

To understand the mechanisms at work, let us first point out a direct link between the content market and the advertising market:

dA

4s m - 1 m2 2 - s

ds = m s - 2 - s 2 m s - 2 + s 2 > 0 (15)

We have the following result:

Lemma 3. The less differentiated the media products (the higher s), the larger the volume of advertising.

We thus see that the advertising volume increases if the media products become closer substitutes. This is a consequence of the existence of a two-sided market and the nature of competition in those two markets. Tougher competition in the content market implies that the media firms must rely more on the advertising market for raising revenue.
Godes et al. (2009) also analyze the financing of media firms, but they use a framework that is very different from ours. In particular, they assume that the advertisers have a per se preference for spreading the ads over the different media outlets. Their modeling approach has the advantage that it allows them to analyze competition in the advertising market even between media products that the consumers consider as completely unrelated, but has the disadvantage that the competitive pressure in the content market has no effect on the advertising volume. More specifically, this means that Godes et al. (in our notation) have dA/ds = 0.11
Now we are ready to look more closely at the sources of revenues:

d pC ds

=-

m

ms 2-s

m2 - 1 2 - s -s 2 m 2-s

+s 2 <0

(16)

d rA s m-1 m2 8-2s -s2 +s2 -2ms

= ds

m 2-s -s 2 m 2-s +s 3 > 0 (17)

We can state our first main results:

Proposition 1. The less differentiated the media products (the higher s),
(i) the higher are the revenues from ads (d rA /ds > 0), and
(ii) the lower are the revenues from consumer payment (d pC /ds < 0).
Figure 1 illustrates Proposition 1 for m = 2. With our assumption that = 1, the gains from selling advertising space are so low compared to the consumers'

11 Their modeling approach further implies that total advertising revenue is proportional to the size of the audience. Holding the size of the audience fixed, Godes et al. (2009) thus arrive at the result that a greater substitutability between the media products (from the consumer' point of view) leaves advertising revenue unchanged but reduces consumer revenue.

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

1119

Figure 1 Revenue from Consumers and Advertisers m = 2

rA, pC 0.25

Consumer revenue Advertising revenue

0.20

pC

0.15

0.10

0.05

rA

0.00

s

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

distaste for ads that a monopoly media firm would prefer to be advertising free. At s = 0 the media firms thus raise all their revenue from consumer payments (A = 0 from Equation (10)). However, the closer substitutes the media products are, the more fiercely they compete to capture an audience. Because this will make it difficult to raise revenues from consumer payment, the media firms will have to rely more on the advertising market to raise revenue. If s  1 the media products are perceived as (almost) perfect substitutes. At this extreme, they are unable to charge a price that is higher than marginal costs on the consumer side of the market (p = 0 from Equation (9)). This follows directly from the result that consumer prices are strategic complements (and the assumption that all media firms have the same marginal costs, which we have set equal to zero).
In contrast to our result, Godes et al. (2009) find that it is ambiguous how differentiation on contents affects ad revenues and revenues from consumer payment. This is due to their application of a standard quadratic utility function, where one and the same parameter captures both product differentiation and market size. In their framework it is thus not possible to isolate the effects of a change in product differentiation on the media firms' revenue. Technically, an increase in their parameter implies both that the products become less differentiated and that the size of the market falls.12
Note that Equation (14) yields

dS

ms m - 1 m 4 - 3s + s

ds = - m 1 - s + s 2 m 2 - s - s 2 < 0

(18)

We can state

Corollary 1. The share of consumer payment in the media firms' total revenue is smaller the less differentiated the media products are (dS/ds < 0).

12 See the explanation Godes et al. (2009) provide for their Result 4. This explanation is also relevant for understanding their Result 3 and in particular their Result 3(ii).

Corollary 1 is directly related to Proposition 1, which shows that advertising revenue is higher and consumer payments lower the less differentiated the media products are (as in Godes et al. 2009). In the appendix we prove that Corollary 1 is valid for an arbitrary number of n.
From Equation (11) we find

dC/ds =

m

m-1 2-s +s

2

>0

This implies

Corollary 2. Other things being equal, consumption of each media product is larger the closer substitutes they are; dC/ds > 0.

To understand the intuition for Corollary 2, note that consumption of each media product is affected in two opposing ways as s increases: consumer prices go down, and this has a positive impact on the size of the audiences. At the same time, the amount of advertising goes up. In isolation, this tends to reduce the sales of the media products. However, the former effect dominates. The reason for this is simply that an increase in s means that competition increases, such that the media firms' ability to utilize their market power over the consumer is reduced. Thereby the size of the audiences is unambiguously higher the closer substitutes the media firms deliver, as stated in Corollary 2. Other things equal, this result is similar to what we typically find in one-sided markets.
In combination, Corollaries 1 and 2 predict that media firms that are mainly advertising financed have relatively large audiences. However, this is not because they seek a broader audience as such. On the contrary, a media firm with large market power would in our model choose high user payments and accept a relatively small audience. This fits well with the observation that pay-TV channels and newspapers with few close substitutes typically have high prices and small audiences. By the same token, one observes that electronic newspapers with unique contents are able to charge their visitors directly but that this reduces the number of readers.
A few words on how Assumptions 1 and 2 affect our results may be warranted. First, the smaller is, the less profitable the advertising market for the media firms is. Second, it should be noted that n (the number of advertisers) can be interpreted as a proxy for the media firms' market power over the advertisers--the smaller n is, the less able the media firms are to extract the profit that advertising generates. Both a lower value of and a smaller n thus reduce advertising revenue for the media firms. It nonetheless remains true that as s approaches one, the media firms can make a profit only from the ad market. Letting < 1 and n < would thus neither

1120

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

change the result that the media firms prefer to be advertising free as monopolies nor that they must rely solely on ad revenue if they are perceived as perfect substitutes.
With > 1, we must distinguish between two cases. If is above a critical value crit, we reach a corner solution where the media firms raise all their revenues from advertising, no matter how poor substitutes the media products are. This corresponds to the underpricing result in Godes et al. (2009).13 If 1 <
< crit, on the other hand, the media firms will make profits from both the advertising and the consumer side of the market for any s  0 1 . Proposition 1 still holds, although advertising revenue is more important and consumer payments less important for the media firms the higher s is. In this respect, Assumptions 1 and 2 are innocent for our qualitative results.
In our model the advertising prices are determined by the media firms. Alternatively, the prices of advertising could be set in negotiations between advertisers and media firms.14 This is most relevant in the case with a limited number of advertisers. In the appendix we consider a Nash bargaining game between one advertiser and two media firms.15 Not surprisingly, we find that the more bargaining power given to the advertiser, the lower the price of advertising. We further verify that independent of the distribution of the bargaining power, the media firms will rely solely on consumer payments at s = 0 and solely on advertising revenue at s = 1.
Based on intuition from one-sided markets, one might expect that each media firm will have less advertising revenue the smaller its bargaining power. However, this is not necessarily the case. On the contrary, the media firms' advertising revenue, both absolutely and relative to consumer payments, might be increasing in the advertiser's bargaining power (see the appendix). The reason for this is that each media firm will partly internalize the fact that a higher advertising volume reduces the consumers' willingness to pay for the media product; in general, the media firms will therefore prefer to have fewer ads than the volume that maximizes advertising revenue. The media firms' ability to internalize this effect is higher the greater is their market power (i.e., the smaller s is and the higher their bargaining power over the advertiser). The advertiser will not take this
13 This was discussed in detail in an earlier version of the paper; see Kind et al. (2005). In the appendix we show that if m = n = 1, then we have underpricing if 3 < / < 3 + 2 2.
14 We would like to thank one of the referees for suggesting this possibility.
15 See Dukes and Gal-Or (2003) and Gal-Or and Dukes (2003) for an alternative setup of bargaining between advertisers and media firms.

effect into account. If he has the power to do so, he therefore sets advertising prices that are so low that the advertising volume becomes unduly high from the media firms' point of view. This might generate higher advertising revenue for the media firms, but the gain is more than outweighed by reduced consumer payments (it is straightforward to show that the media firms' profit is decreasing in the advertiser's bargaining power). Put differently, more bargaining power to the advertiser leads to a lower price of ads, which in turn causes the advertising levels and possibly the media firms' advertising revenue to increase. However, more ads lead to a reduction in the consumption of the media product and thereby to less revenues from consumer payment.

4.2. The Role of the Number of Media Products In this section we analyze how the financing of media firms depends on the number of competitors. First, let us consider a shift from monopoly (m = 1) to duopoly (m = 2). From Equation (14) we find

s2

S m=2 -S m=1 =-

<0

4 - 3s 2 - s

for s > 0 (19)

We can state

Corollary 3. If the market structure changes from monopoly to duopoly, then the relative importance of advertising revenue increases.

Note that S m = 2 - S m = 1 = 0 if s = 0. Whether

we have one or two media firms thus does not matter

per se for the choice of business model. What does

matter is whether there is competition between the

media firms. If there are two media firms in the mar-

ket, then advertising revenue will be a more impor-

tant source of income if these firms compete (s > 0)

than if each of them has monopoly power in its own

market segment (s = 0).16 This is nothing but a spe-

cial case of Corollary 1. Not surprisingly, we therefore

cannot generalize from this how the relative impor-

tance of advertising revenue depends on the number

of competing media firms.

Let us thus consider the effects of changing the

number of media firms, holding the differentiation

between the media products fixed. It is easily verified

that both advertising prices and consumer prices are

decreasing in m. The effects of an increase in m on

each of those two sources of revenues are as follows:

d pC dm

=-

1 - s m2 4 1 - s + s2 m 2-s -s 2 m 2-s

+ s2 +s 2

<0

(20)

d rA dm

=

-2s2 m 2 - s m 2-

s

2-s m- 3- -s 2 m 2-s

s +s +s 3

<

0

for m  2 (21)

16 In the latter case S = 0, given Assumption 1.

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

1121

We have the following result:

Proposition 2. Assume that m  2 and s  0 1 . An increase in the number of media firms will then lead to lower revenues from both advertising and consumer payment; d pC /dm < 0 and d rA /dm < 0.

Note the asymmetry between Propositions 1 and 2. If the competitive pressure increases as a result of greater substitutability between the goods, one source of revenue will increase (advertising) and the other will decrease (consumer payments). If the higher competitive pressure is caused by a larger number of rivals, on the other hand, then both sources of revenue will fall for each firm. Godes et al. (2009) also analyse financing of media firms, but they do not address this question, because their analysis is limited to cases of monopoly and duopoly.
Proposition 2 does not say anything about the relative importance of the two revenue sources when the number of competitors increases. To focus on this issue, suppose that new TV channels enter the market. Then the advertisers can reach each viewer on a larger number of channels. Thus, each channel's market power in the advertising market falls, and the advertising price will approach marginal costs as the number of TV channels increases. In the limit we find from Equation (8) that

lim r = 0

(22)

m

In contrast, the consumers perceive the media products as imperfect substitutes as long as s < 1. The media firms will therefore have some market power over the consumers, no matter how many media products there are on the market. This is formally verified from Equation (9):

1-s

lim p =

> 0 for s < 1

(23)

m

2-s

Equations (22) and (23) suggest that as the num-

ber of media firms grows, they will to an increasingly

large extent have to rely on direct charges from the

consumers. We can state the following result:

Proposition 3. Assume that m  2 and s  0 1 . Then the share of consumer payment in each media firm's total revenue is higher the larger the number of rivals; dS/dm > 0.

Proof. From Equation (14) we find

dS s2 1 - s m m - 2 2 - s - s dm = m 1 - s + s 2 m 2 - s - s 2 > 0,

where the inequality can be shown to hold for all s  0 1 and m  3. Inserting for m = 2 and m = 3 into (14) we further have

S m=3 -S m=2

=

s2 1 - s 2 3 - 2s 2 2 - s 4 - 3s

>0

for s  0 1 Q.E.D.

Figure 2 Revenue Sources
S (m,s) 1.0

0.8

m = 10

m=2

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

s

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

In combination, Corollary 3 and Proposition 3 state that consumer payments' share of media firms' revenues is nonmonotonically related to the number of firms: As we move from monopoly to duopoly, consumer payments' share decreases. However, as the number of firms is increased beyond duopoly, consumer payments' share increases. This shows that one should be careful with drawing conclusions about the effects of increased competition merely from a comparison of monopoly and duopoly.
Figure 2, which measures s on the horizontal axis and S on the vertical axis, illustrates how the share of consumer payments in each media firm's revenue (S) depends on the number (m) and the substitutability (s) between the media products. The upper and lower curves in the figure are found by setting m = 10 and m = 2, respectively, into Equation (14). From Corollary 1 we know that dS/ds < 0. Both curves are therefore downward sloping. Consistent with Proposition 3 we further see that S m = 10 > S m = 2 for all s  0 1 . Increased competition in the form of higher substitutability versus a large number of competing media products thus has opposite consequences for the relative importance of the two sources of revenue for each media firm.
In the appendix we prove that except for Proposition 3, all the propositions and corollaries hold also for any value of n. The qualification we must make on Proposition 3 is that dS/dm > 0 if m  3 if n < ; the difference S m = 3 - S m = 2 is then negative if s is below a critical value (this critical value is lower the smaller is n, and reaches a minimum at s = 0 83 for n = 1). However, this observation is of limited value because it is hard to imagine a media industry where the number of media competitors is lower than three. For all practical purposes, the model therefore predicts that dS/dm > 0 independent of the number of advertisers.
Although our model is simple, we believe that our main result is quite robust. When the number of

1122

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

media firms approaches infinity, we predict that there is a very limited scope for the media firms to earn revenues from advertising. This is simply because the market power of each media firm in the advertising market then becomes insignificant. In the consumer market, on the other hand, each media firm will still have some market power as long as it produces a media product that is differentiated from those of the rivals.
5. Some Empirical Observations
According to our theoretical predictions, media firms face two qualitatively different competitive constraints. On the one hand, the scope for raising revenues from consumer payment is constrained by other media firms offering close substitutes. On the other hand, the scope for raising revenues from ads is constrained by the number of media firms. Let us provide some examples, which we claim indicate that the driving forces at work in our model are indeed present in media markets.
Media firms on the Internet have to consider the trade-off between consumer payments and ads, and we have seen various business models being used. As mentioned in the introduction, in December 2005 CNN launched CNN Pipeline as an online video news product financed purely by consumer payments and not by ads. The business model was then totally reversed in June 2007. Consumer payments were removed, and the service became financed purely by ads. Some commentators have indicated that the change in business model was because other close substitutes were launched.17 Such a change in business model is consistent with our theory because closer substitutes for the consumers should lead to less reliance on subscription.
There seems to be a trend on the Internet towards less reliance on consumer payments, but there are exceptions. CNN's experience can be contrasted with TV2 Sumo. The latter is a Web page for the Norwegian broadcaster TV2, where consumers can pay for watching various video programs.18 The most important content on TV2 Sumo is live soccer matches from the Norwegian Premier League ("Tippeligaen"). TV2 has the exclusive right to broadcast these matches, which implies that there are no close substitutes on the Internet. A business model based on consumer payments is thus viable according to our results.
17 See the description of CNN Pipeline on Wikipedia: http://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/CNN_Pipeline. According to CNN, the subscription model was abandoned because there were too few subscribers; see http://behindthescenes.blogs.cnn.com/2007/06/25/ a-special-note-for-our-cnn-pipeline-subscribers/.
18 TV2 Sumo offers a menu of tariffs where you can subscribe either weekly, montly, or annually, or simply pay for watching one particular program. For details, see http://webtv.tv2.no/webtv/.

On the Internet we also have more traditional news Web pages, where typically printed newspapers launch an online version of the printed news. Also in this case we observe different business models. The New York Times had a similar experience as CNN Pipeline. They launched a subscription service called TimesSelect in September 2005 and removed the subscription in September 2007. The Wall Street Journal, on the other hand, continues to offer online subscription.19 If a user subscribes, she not only receives updated online news, but she also has access to an online market data center. This suggests that the Wall Street Journal might offer more unique content than what TimesSelect did, i.e., that the Wall Street Journal's online service does not have as close substitutes seen from the consumer's perspective. A business model with a subscription for the online Wall Street Journal, but not for TimesSelect, is then consistent with our predictions.
It could be argued that technological progress is the main reason why TV channels now rely more on consumer payments than they used to do. We certainly agree with this claim; it is only with the advent of encrypted digital signals that it has become possible for TV channels to charge their viewers directly (and it is digital transmission technologies that have allowed the large increase in the number of TV channels). However, our model suggests that digitalization of TV signals and fundamental economic forces might be complementary factors in explaining the growth of pay-TV. As noted in §1, in the United Kingdom and the United States we have witnessed both a shift towards raising revenues through subscription and large technological changes in this industry during the last few years. Similar developments have taken place in other countries--for example, through the replacement of analogue terrestrial networks with digital terrestrial networks. This makes it possible for consumers to have access to a larger number of TV channels. Such structural changes in the industry will, according to our predictions, undermine each TV channel's prospects of raising revenues from advertising. It is no surprise then that we observe a shift towards more reliance on user payment than on revenues from advertising.
Clearly, there is reason to believe that the growth in Internet newspapers has reduced the demand for printed newspapers. In this sense it is not surprising that the number of printed newspapers has declined, raising their dependence on advertising revenue in accordance with our model. Furthermore, the mechanisms we have highlighted suggest that their tendency to rely on advertising revenue should increase
19 The subscription fee is $1.99 per week for online service or $2.49 per week for online service and print journal; see https://order.wsj. com/sub/f2.

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

1123

the better substitutes the readers consider printed and electronic newspapers to be. However, a further analysis of this issue requires a more elaborate model, which takes into consideration the specific characteristics of the two kinds of newspapers and the competitive forces within and between these two market segments. There is also a need for empirical work to analyze how the Internet has reduced the willingness to pay for ads in traditional newspapers relative to the readers' willingness to pay for printed media.
6. Concluding Remarks
The main purpose of this paper is to show how competitive forces may affect the way media firms raise revenue. It turns out that competition has an ambiguous effect on the choice of business model. Tougher competition in the sense of closer substitutability between the media products makes advertising revenue relatively more important, whereas a larger number of media products (e.g., a larger number of TV channels) increases the relative importance of direct payment from the audience.
Our analysis demonstrates that competition in media markets differs from what we observe in most other industries. More specifically, the twosided nature of media markets implies that competition in consumer prices is qualitatively different from competition in advertising prices. As is the case in more traditional markets, consumer prices are strategic complements: if one media firm reduces the price it charges from its audience, it will be optimal for the other firms to do the same. Advertising prices, on the other hand, are strategic substitutes; a price reduction by one firm leads to a price increase by the others. Competition in strategic complements is generally more aggressive than competition in strategic substitutes and more so the less differentiated the products (see Bulow et al. 1985, Vives 1999). This explains why we arrive at the result that the closer substitutes the competing media firms' products are, the larger is the fraction of their revenue is that comes from advertising.
We argue that it is difficult for media firms to commit to quantity of advertising. Moreover, because competition in strategic substitutes is weaker than competition in strategic complements, in our model it is a dominant strategy for the media firms to compete in advertising prices rather than advertising quantities. Thus, the firms do not have incentives to make nonreversible commitments with respect to advertising quantities. Future empirical and theoretical research should analyze how robust this conclusion is. The observation that Internet newspapers (and TV channels) that are very close substitutes manage to raise significant advertising revenue supports

our argument that they compete in strategic substitutes on the advertising side.
The predictions from our theory have clear-cut managerial implications. Media firms should carefully watch the competitive constraints they are facing when they make a strategic choice concerning financing. In particular, they should determine whether the main competitive constraint is (1) another media product that is viewed on as a close substitute by the consumers or (2) many other media firms that are good alternatives for the advertisers. In the former case it is difficult for the media firm to raise revenues from consumer payment, simply because consumers would then switch to another media product. In the latter case it is difficult for the media firm to raise revenues from advertisers, because the advertisers would then switch to other media firms with a lower price on ads. As illustrated by the change in business model for CNN Pipeline, it is very important for the media firm to anticipate the changing environment they will be facing in the near future. If CNN had anticipated that quite soon after the introduction of their new service they would be challenged by new rivals offering close substitutes, they would have realized that financing the service by subscription could not be a viable business model. In the same manner, TV channels should anticipate that the technological change will make more TV channels available to the viewers and therefore reduce the prospects of raising revenues from commercial breaks. Fortunately, the TV channels in the United Kingdom and the United States seem to have adapted better to such a change in the competitive constraint than what was the case with CNN, as they have gradually shifted their financing from advertising towards subscription fees.
Our model may be considered as a complement to research papers on media economics that build on Hotelling and Salop frameworks.20 The advantage of the Hotelling framework is that it makes it possible to endogenize the extent of horizontal differentiation between the media products. However, a disadvantage of both Hotelling and Salop is that the size of the market is typically given such that aggregate output is independent of whether there is any competition. In our framework, competition leads to higher aggregate output, and we believe that this is a reasonable prediction both in the media industry and in other markets. The main motivation for our choice of framework, however, is that it allows us to analyze the consequences of increasing the number of rivals in the market.
In this study, we predict how some fundamental economic forces in the media industry affect
20 See, e.g., Anderson and Coate (2005), Gabszewicz et al. (2004a, b), and Liu et al. (2004).

1124

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

media firms' financing. There should be a scope for empirically testing the validity of our model and comparing this with the validity of other relevant models--in particular, with that of Godes et al. (2009). One way to discriminate between the two models is to test whether there is any relationship between the advertising volume in a media outlet and the extent to which the competitors produce close substitutes. According to Godes et al. there should be no relationship, whereas our model indicates a positive relationship. However, such a test must take into account idiosyncratic institutional features of the media industry. For example, one should control for the fact that some countries have upper limits on the amount of advertising on TV, that contracts often are more complex than simple linear prices, and that list prices on advertising can differ significantly from actual prices. Empirical analyses must further take into account the fact that some media firms are vertically as well as horizontally integrated and that ownership concentration has increased over time.

Appendix A. Equilibrium with an Arbitrary Number of Advertisers
Define N  n/ n + 1 . Note that N is monotonically increasing in n, varying from N = 1/2 for n = 1 to N  1 as n .

A.1. Proof That d /ds < 0 and d /dm < 0 for Any n Differentiating Equation (12) with respect to s yields

d ds

=s

m-1

2 2s

3m2 m

2-s 2-s

2 + s2 +s 3

N - m 2-s m 2-s -s

+s 3
3

where we note that d /ds is more likely to be positive the larger N is. Setting N = 1 we find d /ds = -s m - 1 2 · m 2 - s + s -3 < 0, from which it follows that d /ds < 0 for
all feasible values of N . Q.E.D.
Differentiating Equation (12) with respect to m yields

d

2s3

=-

dm

2-s

m - 1 N T1 + 1 - s m 2 - s m 2-s +s 3 m 2-s -s 3

+ s 3T2

where T1  4m 1 - s m - 2 + s2 m - 1 2 > 0 and T2  2 - s m - 1 + 2 1 - s 2 > 0. Because all the terms both in the numerator and the denominator are positive, it follows that d /dm < 0 for any value of N . Q.E.D.

A.2. Proof of Proposition 1 for Arbitrary Values of n (d rA /ds > 0 and d pC /ds < 0)
From Equations (8) and (10) we find

dr ds

=

m

m-1 2-s +s

2

>

0

and

dA

4Nm2s m - 1 2 - s

ds = m 2 - s - s 2 m 2 - s + s 2 > 0

(A1)

which proves Proposition 1(i), that d rA /ds > 0.

Equations (9) and (11) yield

C dp + p dC ds ds

s1

s2

=-

m-1

m 2-s +s 2 + 4-5s 2-s m2 +2ms 1-s +s2 N m 2-s +s 2 m 2-s -s 3s-1 m-1 -1

(A2)

The term s1 is always positive for m  2, while s2 might be negative for s > 4/5. The absolute value of s2 is increasing in N , such that we must have s1 + s2 > 0 for any N  1 if s1 + s2 is positive for N = 1. Suppose that N = 1. We then find

s1 + s2 = m 2 - s m + 1 m 2 - s - s > 0

(A3)

which implies that d pC /ds = C dp/ds + p dC/ds < 0. This proves Proposition 1(ii). Q.E.D.

A.3. Proof of Corollary 1 for Arbitrary Values of n dS/ds < 0
Totally differentiating Equation (13) with respect to s and simplifying, we have

dS C p/ s +p C/ s rA+ -A r/ s -r

= ds

pC +rA 2

From §A.2 above it follows that

A/ s pC (A4)

-

-

dS = ds

C

p/ s + p

C/ s rA + -A r/ s - r pC + rA 2

A/ s pC

< 0 Q.E.D.

A.4. Negotiations Between One Advertiser and Two Media Firms
Consider a context where we have two TV channels and one advertiser, and where the advertiser bargains simultaneously with each of the TV channels over the advertising price. We assume the same timing structure as in the main body of the paper.

Subgame After Bargaining Breakdown. Suppose bar-
gaining broke down between Channel 1 and the adver-
tiser. Firms set consumer prices p1 and p2. Channel 2 and the advertiser agree on advertising price r2. Channel 1 is without advertising. With no advertising in Channel 1, con-
sumers' demand for content in the two channels is

C1

=

1 2

1+

1 2

1

s -

s

A2

-

p1

- s p1 + p2 1-s

/2

C2

=

1 2

1-

1 2

2 1

- -

s s

A2

-

p2

- s p1 + p2 1-s

/2

This implies the following demand for advertising at Channel 2:

1-s 1 1 s

1-s

A2

=

2

-

s

-

2 p2

+

2

2

-

s

p1

-

2 2

-

s

r2

Thus, the profit of the advertiser, in case of a breakdown at Channel 1, is

1t =

2 1-s

-

2 - s p2 + sp1 - 4 1 - s r2 2 16 2 - s 1 - s

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

1125

Channel 1, in case of a breakdown, has revenue only from
consumers. Using expressions for C1 and A2 above, we find Channel 1's profit in case of breakdown as

1t = p1

2 4-s 2-s

+

1

s -

s

p2

-

s2 - 8s + 8 2-s 1-s

p1

-

2

4 -

s

r2

These are the threat points for the bargaining between

Channel 1 and the advertiser. Similarly, we find the threat

points for the bargaining between Channel 2 and the adver-

tiser:

2t =

2 1-s

-

2 - s p1 + sp2 - 4 1 - s r1 2 16 2 - s 1 - s

2 4-s

s

s2 - 8s + 8

4

2t = p2 2 - s + 1 - s p1 - 2 - s 1 - s p2 - 2 - s r1

Subgame After Successful Bargaining. When bargaining does not break down in either channel, there is advertising in both channels. We have the following demand for content (i j = 1 2 i = j):

1 Ci = 2

1 - Ai - s Ai + Aj /2 - pi - s pi + pj /2

1-s

1-s

(A5)

This gives

Ai

=

1 2

1 - pi -

2-s

ri - srj

(A6)

Now we need to find expressions for profits. Following prices p1 p2 r1 r2 set in stage 1, the advertiser will earn

=

1 4

+

2- 4

s

r12 + r22

-

1 2

r1 +r2

s

1 2-s

+ 2 r1r2 + 16 1-s

p12 + p22

1

1s

1

- 4

p1 + p2

- 8 1 - s p1p2 + 2

r1p1 + r2p2

Channel i will earn

i

=

1 2

ri 1 - 2 - s ri - srj

+ pi 2

1

-

1 2

2 1

- -

s s

pi

+

1 2

1

s -

s

pj

Let  0 1 denote the bargaining power of the advertiser such that the bargaining power of the advertiser is increasing in (the second-order conditions do not hold in the limit = 1 . In the main body of the paper, we have treated the case where = 0 such that each media firm sets the advertising price in order to maximize its own profit.
The Nash product for the bargaining between Channel i and the advertiser for an arbitrary value of is

NPi =

i-

1- it

- it

Solving i/ pi = NPi/ ri = 0 simultaneously for i = 1 2 we find a unique, symmetric equilibrium. Letting
p  p1 = p2 and r  r1 = r2 we have

p= 2 1-s 4 - 3s

(A7)

r=

4- 3+ s 4 - 3s 4 - 1 +

s

(A8)

Because of symmetry we also have A = A1 = A2 and C = C1 = C2. Using Equations (A6) and (A7), we have for s > 0 that

dA d

=

4 - 3s

2s2 4- 1+

s 2 >0

and

dr = -

2s2

d

4 - 3s 4 - 1 +

s 2 <0

Figure A.1
S 1.0
0.8
0.6

The Share of Consumer Payments in the Media Firms' Revenue Under Bargaining
= 0 = 0.5

0.4

0.2

0.0

s

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

This means that the higher the advertiser's bargaining power, the higher the advertising volume and the lower the price of advertising. The higher advertising level in turn implies that consumption falls:

dC d

=-

4 - 3s

s2 4- 1+

s 2 <0

Concerning each media firm's revenue on the two sides of the market, we further have

d pC

1 - s 2s2

d = - 4 - 3s 2 4 - 1 + s 2 < 0

d rA d

= s2

8 - s2 - 6s - s 2 + s 4 - 3s 2 4 - 1 + s 3

and 0

We thus see that revenue from consumer payments unambiguously is decreasing in the advertiser's bargaining power. However, the media firms' revenue from the advertising market is increasing in the bargaining power of the advertiser unless both and s are sufficiently large (in which case the media firms have little ability to internalize the externalities between the two sides of the market). Figure A.1 thus illustrates that the share of consumer payments in the media firms' revenue is smaller for = 0 5 than for
= 0, where = 0 is the case studied in the main text.

A.5. Proof of Corollary 2 for Arbitrary Values of n dC/ds > 0
Differentiating Equation (11) with respect to s we find

dC

m 2 - s + s 2 - 4ms 2 - s N

ds = m - 1 m 2 - s + s 2 m 2 - s - s 2

(A9)

Equation (A9) is less likely to be positive the larger is N .

Setting N = 1, which is its highest possible value, we find

that

N =1

C s

=

m

m-1 2-s +s

2

>0

It follows that C/ s > 0 for all feasible values of N . Q.E.D.

A.6. Proof of Proposition 2 for Arbitrary Values of n (d rA /dm < 0 and d pC /dm < 0)
From (8) and (9) we have

dp

s 1-s

dr

2-s

dm = - m 2-s -s 2 < 0 and dm = - m 2-s +s 2 < 0

1126

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

For the advertising volume in each media outlet we have from Equation (10) that

dA = -Ns2 4m 1 - s

dm

m 2-s

m - 2 + s2 m - 1 2 -s 2 m 2-s +s 2 <0

Using Equation (11) we find

dC dm

=

-

m

2-s

m-2s +s2 m 2-s +s 2 -s2 m2 2-s 2 2m-3 +s2 N m2 m 2-s -s 2 m 2-s +s 2

which is more likely to be positive the larger is N . It is straightforward to show that dC/dm < 0 for N = 1. Thus, dC/dm < 0 for all feasible values of N .
Since each media firm's output and prices are decreasing in m, it follows that d rA /dm < 0 and d pC /dm < 0. Q.E.D.

A.7. Proof of Corollary 3 for Arbitrary Values of n (Change from Monopoly to Duopoly)
Using Equations (8)­(13) we find

S m=2 -S m=1 = - 2-s

Ns2 4 - 3s 4 - 3s 2 + s3 N - 1

< 0 Q.E.D.

A.8. The Validity of Proposition 3 for Arbitrary Values of n (dS/dm > 0 for m  2)
By inserting for (8)­(11) into (13) and differentiating with respect to m we find

dS = Ns2 dm

1-s

2s3

m-1 2

2-s N + D2

m 2-s

+s

where

(A10)

D  s3 m-1 2 2-s N + 1-s m-s m 2-s +s 2 > 0 and  2-s 2m3 -m2 2-s 4+s +s 2-s 5+2s m-s2 5-2s

The first term in the numerator of (A10) is positive for all m  2 and increasing in N . Since N  1/2 1 , a sufficient condition for dS/dm being positive is that the numerator of (A10) is positive for N = 1/2. Setting N = 1/2 we can rewrite the numerator of (A10) to

T = T1 2 - s m2 + T2

(A11)

where

T1  2 - s 2m2 - 4 2 - s m + s 6 - 2s - s2 and T2  2s3 2 - s m - s3 3 - s

The term T2 is positive for all m  1. A sufficient condition for T being positive is therefore that T1 > 0. Factorization of T1 yields
T1 = 2 - s 2 m - t1 m - t2
where

2 - 2 1 - s 2 - s + s3

t1 =

2-s

and

t2 = 2 +

2 1 - s 2 - s + s3 2-s

Since s  0 1 we have t1  0 1 and t2  2 3 . We thus see that a sufficient (but not necessary) condition for dS/dm > 0 is that m  3.
Inserting for m = 3 and m = 2 into S shows that S m = 3 - S m = 2 is increasing in N , with S m = 3 - S m = 2 > 0 for s > 0 83 with N = 1/2 and S m = 3 - S m = 2 > 0 for all s as N  .

Appendix B. On Underpricing of the Media Products
If the ratio / is sufficiently large it is optimal for the media firms to set the consumer price below marginal costs (while it is optimal to have no advertising if the ratio / is sufficiently small). This is true for any m  1 and n  1, but to simplify the algebra we consider only the case m = n = 1. From Equation (3) we then find that consumer demand for the media product equals

C =1- A-p

(B1)

As in the main text, we assume that the advertiser's profit

equals (with m = n = 1 = AC - Ar. Solving / A =

0 subject to (B1) and taking account of the nonnegativity

constraint on advertising, we find the following demand for

advertising:

A = max 0

1-p 2

-r

(B2)

The media firm's profit function is given by the equation = p - c C + rA, which corresponds to Equation (1) in the main text except that we allow for positive marginal costs (c > 0). The firm maximizes profit with respect to p and R, subject to (B1) and (B2). The second-order conditions read

2
p2 = -1 < 0

2 1
r2

=- 1 <0

2
p2

2
r2 -

2
pr

2=6 /

-1- 42

/

2
>0





for 3 - 2 2 < < 3 + 2 2

Solving conditions

/p =

/ r = 0 yields the first-order

p=

3

/ -1 c- / 6 / -1-

2+3 /2

/

and

(B3)

r

=

1 6

- /

c -

1

+ -

/ /2

Output is now given by

A= 1

-1

6

/

1-c -1-

/

2 >0

if

>1

and

C =2

1-c 6 / -1-

/

2

From (B3) we find that

1-c p-c= 3- 6 / -1- / 2

which means that the second-order conditions are satisfied with p - c < 0 if 3 < / < 3 + 2 2.

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

1127

Appendix C. On Competing in Advertising Prices as a Dominant Strategy
It seems unreasonable to assume that the media firms compete in quantities on the consumer side. We will thus prove that it is a dominant strategy for the media firms to compete in advertising prices instead of advertising quantities, given that they compete in prices on the consumer side.
Assume that there are two media firms; m = 2. If both compete in advertising prices, we find from Equation (12) that the profit level of each firm is equal to (with superscripts indicating the media firms' choice variables on the ad side of the market)

r1 i

r2

=

2-s 4-s 2

(C1)

Suppose that media firm 1 deviates and chooses advertising quantity as strategic variable (the results would be symmetric if instead we assumed that the rival deviated). Solving p1 A1 = arg max 1 and p2 r2 = arg max 2, we find p1 = p2 = 2 1 - s / 4 - 3s r2 = 4 - 3s / 16 1 - s + s2 , and A1 = 4s2 1 - s / 4 - 3s 16 1 - s + s2 . The media firms will then have the following profit levels:

A1 1

r2 =

4 1-s 2 4-s 2 2 - s 16 1 - s + s2 2

and

A1 2

r2

=

4 1 - s 4 - 3s 2 2 - s 16 1 - s + s2 2

(C2)

Since

A1 1

r2 -

r1 1

r2

= -s3

2-s

4 4 - 3s 2 - 3s3 4 - s 2 16 1 - s

+ s2 2 < 0

for s > 0

it is not profitable for media firm 1 to deviate from an out-
come where both firms compete in advertising prices.
Suppose next that both firms compete in advertising
quantities. Solving p1 A1 = arg max 1 and p2 A2 = arg max 2 implies that neither of the media firms will have any advertising and that p1 = p2 = 2 1 - s / 4 - 3s .21 The firms then make profits equal to

A1 i

A2

=

1-s 2-s 4 - 3s 2

If media firm 2 deviates and chooses advertising price as

strategic variable, we can solve p1 A1 = arg max 1 and

p2 r2 = arg max 2 to find that

by Equation (C2). Since

A1 2

r2

-

A1A21 1r2A2an>d0,

r2 2
it

A1
is

are given profitable

for media firm 2 to deviate.

In sum, it follows that it is a dominant strategy for both

firms to choose price rather than quantity as the strategic

variable in the advertising market. Q.E.D.

References
Anderson, S. P., S. Coate. 2005. Market provision of broadcasting: A welfare analysis. Rev. Econom. Stud. 72(4) 947­972.
Barros, P. P., H. J. Kind, T. Nilssen, L. Sørgard. 2004. Media competition on the Internet. Topics Econom. Anal. Policy 4(1) Article 32.
21 With sufficiently larger than we will have Ai > 0, but this does not change the result that it is less profitable to compete in advertising quantities than in advertising prices.

Beebe, J. 1977. Institutional structure and program choice in television markets. Quart. J. Econom. 91(1) 15­37.
Bulow, J. I., J. D. Geanakoplos, P. D. Klemperer. 1985. Multimarket oligopoly: Strategic substitutes and complements. J. Political Econom. 93(3) 488­511.
Chou, S.-Y., C.-C. Wu. 2006. A comment on "Is having more channels really better? A model of competition among commercial television broadcasters." Marketing Sci. 25(5) 538­542.
Danaher, P. 1995. What happens to television ratings during television commercials? J. Advertising Res. 35(1) 37­48.
Davidson, C., R. Deneckere. 1985. The incentives to form coalitions with Bertrand competition. RAND J. Econom. 16(4) 473­486.
Depken, C. A., II, D. P. Wilson. 2004. Is advertising a good or a bad? Evidence from U.S. magazine subscriptions. J. Bus. 77 S61­S80.
Dukes, A., E. Gal-Or. 2003. Negotiations and exclusivity contracts for advertising. Marketing Sci. 22(2) 222­245.
Gabszewicz, J. J., D. Laussel, N. Sonnac. 2004a. Attitudes towards advertising and price competition in the press industry. V. A. Ginsburgh, ed. Economics of Art and Culture. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 61­74.
Gabszewicz, J. J., D. Laussel, N. Sonnac. 2004b. Programming and advertising competition in the broadcasting industry. J. Econom. Management Strategy 13(4) 657­669.
Gal-Or, E., A. Dukes. 2003. Minimum differentiation in commercial media markets. J. Econom. Management Strategy 12(3) 291­325.
Gal-Or, E., A. Dukes. 2006. On the profitability of media mergers. J. Bus. 79(2) 489­525.
Godes, D., E. Ofek, M. Sarvary. 2009. Content vs. advertising: The impact of competition on media firm strategy. Marketing Sci. 28(1) 20­35.
Goettler, R. L., R. Shachar. 2001. Spatial competition in the network television industry. RAND J. Econom. 32(4) 624­656.
Kind, H. J., T. Nilssen, L. Sørgard. 2005. Financing of media firms: Does competition matter? SNF Working Paper 06/05, Institute for Research in Economics and Business Administration, Bergen, Norway.
Kind, H. J., T. Nilssen, L. Sørgard. 2007. Competition for viewers and advertisers in a TV oligopoly. J. Media Econom. 20(3) 211­233.
Kreps, D. M. 1990. A Course in Microeconomic Theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Liu, Y., D. S. Putler, C. B. Weinberg. 2004. Is having more channels really better? A model of competition among commercial television broadcasters. Marketing Sci. 23(1) 120­133.
Liu, Y., D. S. Putler, C. B. Weinberg. 2006. A reply to "A comment on `Is having more channels really better? A model of competition among commercial television broadcasters.' " Marketing Sci. 25(5) 543­546.
Moriarty, S. E., S.-L. Everett. 1994. Commercial breaks: A viewing behaviour study. Journalism Quart. 71(2) 346­355.
Motta, M. 2004. Competition Policy: Theory and Practice. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
New York Times. 2007. Times to stop charging for parts of its Web site. (September 18) http://www.nytimes.com/ 2007/09/18/business/media/18times.html?_r=2.
Nilssen, T., L. Sørgard. 1998. Time schedule and program profile: TV news in Norway and Denmark. J. Econom. Management Strategy 7(2) 209­235.
Nilssen, T., L. Sørgard. 2001. The TV market: Advertising and programming. Mimeo, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
Ofcom. 2005. The communication market 2005. Report, Ofcom, London.
Peitz, M., T. M. Valletti. 2008. Content and advertising in the media: Pay-TV versus free-to-air. Internat. J. Indust. Organ. 26(4) 949­965.
Rochet, J.-C., J. Tirole. 2003. Platform competition in two-sided markets. J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 1(4) 990­1029.

1128

Kind, Nilssen, and Sørgard: Business Models for Media Firms Marketing Science 28(6), pp. 1112­1128, © 2009 INFORMS

Rochet, J.-C., J. Tirole. 2006. Two-sided markets: A progress report. RAND J. Econom. 37(3) 645­667.
Rust, R. T., M. I. Alpert. 1984. An audience choice model of television viewing choice. Marketing Sci. 3(2) 113­124.
Rust, R. T., N. V. Eechambadi. 1989. Scheduling network television programs: A heuristic audience flow approach to maximizing audience share. J. Advertising 18(2) 11­18.
Shachar, R., J. W. Emerson. 2000. Cast demographics, unobserved segments, and heterogenous switching costs in a television viewing choice model. J. Marketing Res. 37(2) 173­186.
Shaffer, G. 1991. Slotting allowances and resale price maintenance: A comparison of facilitating practices. RAND J. Econom. 22(1) 120­135.

Shubik, M., R. Levitan. 1980. Market Structure and Behavior. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Spence, M., B. Owen. 1977. Television programming, monopolistic competition and welfare. Quart. J. Econom. 91(1) 103­126.
Steiner, P. 1952. Program pattern and preferences, and the workability of competition in radio broadcasting. Quart. J. Econom. 66(2) 194­223.
Vives, X. 1999. Oligopoly Pricing: Old Ideas and New Tools. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Wilbur, K. C. 2008. A two-sided, empirical model of television advertising and viewing markets. Marketing Sci. 27(3) 356­378.

