Vol. 28, No. 5, September­October 2009, pp. 868­886 issn 0732-2399 eissn 1526-548X 09 2805 0868

informs ®
doi 10.1287/mksc.1080.0449 © 2009 INFORMS

Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

A. Yes¸im Orhun
Booth School of Business, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, yesim.orhun@chicagogsb.edu
In a market of consumers with varying willingness to pay, using product line as a discrimination tool may extract higher profits than serving all consumers with a single product. Local context effects, however, point to yet another consideration in designing product lines: how the appeal of a product changes with the context provided by other products in the choice set.
I present a model of product line design that incorporates both discrimination and context management goals and offers recommendations for the variety and positioning of products. To this end, the model makes use of a framework that allows preferences to be choice set dependent. Given this framework, I study how the firm manages externalities between products created by such dependencies. The firm creates distortions above and beyond those resulting from discrimination motives alone. For example, in a vertically differentiated market for quality, quality distortions exist even for the consumers with the highest valuations. The range of quality provisions, given the number of products, is compressed as the relative importance of unfavorable comparisons among products increases. Surprisingly, this compression may even lead the firm to forego discrimination among consumers regardless of the cost of offering distinct products.
Key words: price discrimination; product positioning; context effects; choice set-dependent preferences; context management; behavioral economics
History: Received: June 28, 2007; accepted: May 28, 2008; processed by Ran Kivetz. Published online in Articles in Advance January 12, 2009.

1. Introduction
Optimal product line design emphasizes the strategic use of a menu of products as a discrimination tool in a market with consumers who have private and heterogenous tastes. The design process often assumes that preferences between options do not depend on the presence, absence, or position of other options. This principle is a useful approximation in many cases, but it is violated when consumers care about the relative standing of products. In particular, previous literature on context effects suggests that product lines define a consumer's local choice context and that the consumer's choice decisions are affected by the comparisons among available products within that context.1 For example, Simonson and Tversky (1992) observe the market share of a given brand increasing rather than decreasing when another brand is introduced. As a real-world example, they offer the Williams-Sonoma bread-making device: sales doubled after the introduction of a more expensive but otherwise fairly similar device by the same company,
1 Examples include Huber et al. (1982), Simonson (1989), Simonson and Tversky (1992), Mellers and Cooke (1996), Hsee and Leclerc (1998), and Brenner et al. (1999). Please see Drolet et al. (2000) for an overview of how the choice set influences the choice behavior.

whereas the new device did not sell well. This observation, along with other documented context effects, suggests that managers need to consider not only a product's attribute values but also its position in the choice set. In fact, some firms may be displaying context management considerations, as suggested by the popular press discussion of the cheapest wine on the menu,2 purportedly included on a wine list to make relatively expensive wines fare better in comparison.
The literature on context effects, however, abstracts away from the motivation to offer multiple products to consumers with heterogenous tastes. Therefore, it does not provide comprehensive strategies on optimal product lines. In particular, when consumers have private information about their valuations, product lines can be used profitably as discrimination tools. There is a long literature on the use of product line design as a discrimination tool (e.g., Mussa and Rosen 1978, Moorthy 1984, Oren et al. 1984, Shugan 1984, Reibsten and Gatignon 1984, Dolan 1987). The previous literature on optimal product line design extensively discusses such strategies in the absence of context management considerations. Narasimhan et al. (2005) promote studying the optimal response in a market with consumers who exhibit nonstandard choice
2 Harvard Law Record (2001) and Wall Street Journal (2002).

868

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

869

behavior. Because product lines often determine the local choice context, the need to incorporate choice set-dependent consumer behavior into the optimal product line design seems especially pertinent.
To this end, I explore strategies for product line design that take into account incentives to both discriminate among consumers and manage the context influencing consumer preferences. In the proposed model, a firm internalizes two sets of dependencies: one that arises because of consumers' valuation of comparisons and another that arises due to incentives to discriminate among consumers based on their valuations while managing cannibalization. These considerations carry novel implications for variety in a product line, the composition of consumers a firm chooses to target, and the positioning of these products. This model provides a framework to choose how to manage context depending on the variance of consumers' tastes compared to the importance of comparative valuations and the cost of providing products.
This model of product line design consists of a firm facing vertically differentiated consumers with private valuations. It rests on a descriptive preference framework that can account for the evidence of all context effects. This framework extends the baseline utility model by allowing for a comparative valuation that depends on relative standing of products, in addition to the baseline valuation that depends on absolute levels of attributes. The relative standing of each product with respect to another is defined by the distance of the product from an internal reference point. This reference point is, in turn, a function of the attributes of other products in the choice set, allowing for changes in the choice set to affect preferences. The model incorporates the theory of loss aversion, which posits that consumers care about unfavorable comparisons more than favorable ones. This approach brings together the concept that preferences are reference dependent and consumers are loss averse (Tversky and Kahneman 1991), the hypothesis that this reference is endogenous to the choice set (Bodner and Prelec 2001, Kivetz et al. 2004), and the notion that absolute valuations should be considered separately from comparative valuations (Koszegi and Rabin 2006). This specification makes the preference structure specific to a choice set and can account for the documented choice reversals across contexts. It reverts to the baseline utility model when choice set dependency is not present.
This preference framework enables a firm to design a product line that extracts the most consumer surplus by letting consumers self-select while taking into account that the product line itself can influence this surplus. In particular, the consideration of choice set dependency of preferences brings two new notions to

the attention of the firm: (1) the realization that consumers' preferences are not only individual specific but also depend on the relative standing of the product (reference dependence), and (2) the understanding that this relative standing can be influenced by changes in the choice set (choice set dependence).
These notions lead to fundamentally different product line implications. The understanding of reference dependency alone allows the firm to achieve proper selection and extract more surplus than if the firm projected local trade-offs in attributes to predict the preferences for a product with a different relative standing. In addition, the understanding of choice set dependency leads the firm to consider the externalities of each product's existence and position on other products' valuations by the target consumer segment. Therefore, internalizing these dependencies, the firm introduces spillover effects, which are distortions in the quality provisions above and beyond distortions due to discrimination purposes.
These product adjustments result in different product offerings than those of a firm that ignores such notions. For example, contrary to previous literature, the product line has distortion at the top. In other words, the consumer segment with the highest value for quality receives a different quality level than would be provided if this segment were the only one in the market. Whereas distortion at the top is one surprising result, a variety of spillover effects operate throughout the product line. In general, spillover effects are in a direction that decreases unfavorable comparisons and increases favorable ones, which may or may not be in the same direction as distortions due to discrimination motives. The magnitude of a spillover effect for a given product depends on the degree to which the product can influence the perceived relative standing of other products, the weight that consumers attach to comparisons, and the importance of the segments that are affected by these comparisons. Surprisingly, even though consumers are loss averse, the spillovers created to manage favorable comparisons may prevail over those that aim to manage unfavorable ones in equilibrium. Conditional on the identity of the consumer segments served, the range of quality offered in equilibrium decreases with the degree of loss aversion over each attribute. This result is labeled herein as the compression effect.
Product line length is also a tool for profit management because the existence of each product affects the relative standing of other products. I find that a firm may trim the product line to serve multiple distinct segments of consumers with the same product if the increase in profits due to discrimination is outweighed by the decrease in profits induced by comparisons, a result labeled herein as the pooling

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

870

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

effect. Remarkably, the firm's incentive to pool is independent of other factors previously suggested in the study of product line design, such as costs or distribution of valuations. It arises solely as a result of context management.
The model fleshes out the fundamental trade-offs between discrimination and context management. The implications on product positions for a given set of target consumers contributes to our intuition about the forces at play. Given a particular situation, this model can be used to provide recommendations on not only the positions of products but also on the identity of consumers served. I discuss incentives that may lead a firm to serve entirely different consumer segments, which might otherwise be unprofitable, or to stop providing otherwise profitable products that create unfavorable comparisons to augment the valuation of key segments. I refer to these trimming or extension strategies as augmentation effects. These strategies relate to the recommendations of experimental work that studied the effects of context changes due to the addition or elimination of products.
This paper builds on ideas presented in the existing literature and combines them in a novel way. It provides a psychologically richer preference framework with the intention of incorporating the evidence on choice set-dependent consumer behavior. Therefore, it enables the firm to design a product line that both discriminates among consumers and manages the context that influences their preferences.
2. Model: Choice Set-Dependent Preferences
To the extent that the attractiveness of an option is influenced by its standing relative to other options, current models of optimal product lines may fall short in achieving proper selection and maximizing profits because they are based on choice models that do not take into account how preferences for a given product vary with alterations to the choice set. In this section, I present a preference framework that captures choice set-dependent behavior of consumers with the intention of drawing on it for studying a firm's response to such behavior.
Any framework that incorporates choice set-dependent behavior should reflect the fact that consumers' choice decisions depend at least partly on comparisons among available products within a given context. In the framework presented below, such comparisons are modeled by introducing reference dependence, where the reference point is determined by the alternatives in the choice set. As a result, preferences travel with the choice set to the extent that changes in the choice set reflect on the reference point.
Specifically, if the alternatives in a choice set are indexed by j = 1 2 J and the attributes of

products be indexed by k = 1 2 K , the individual i's valuation of alternative j is composed of the baseline absolute valuation and the comparative valuation:

K

K

uij = vik xjk + fk vik xjk - vik xrk

k=1

k=1

where xjk is the level of attribute k in alternative j and xrk is the attribute-specific reference point. The choice set-independent valuation component vik xjk , labeled as absolute valuation, is assumed to be additively separable in the attributes of the product, continuous, increasing, and differentiable. Comparative valuations fk vik xjk - vik xrk depend on departures from a choice set-specific reference point xrk for attribute k. Absolute valuations capture the baseline valuations and trade-offs such as dislike for high sugar content or the preference for more quality at a given price. This attribute-level specification of absolute valuation alone has been the workhorse for modeling choice set-independent behavior but cannot capture choice set-dependent behavior.
Comparative valuation, in turn, introduces responsiveness to changes in the relative standing of a product with respect to others in the choice set. This component incorporates reference dependency and allows for loss aversion (Tversky and Kahneman 1991) such that losses loom larger than gains in comparisons to the reference point. Although we can allow for more general forms, using a linear comparative valuation function is sufficient to capture the first-order effects of loss aversion:

fk vik xjk - vik xrk

=

k · vik xjk - vik xrk

if vik xjk < vik xrk

k · vik xjk - vik xrk if vik xjk  vik xrk

where k > k. The loss sensitivity parameter k captures the dislike of being in the region of losses in attribute k compared to the reference point for that attribute. The gain parameter k, on the other hand, captures the increase in the value of being in the region of gains compared to the reference point. For example, in the price dimension, this reflects a consumer's increased valuation for the good due to knowing that he or she paid less than expected, i.e., some form of a "deal effect." The degree of loss aversion in either attribute can be described as
k/ k. Note that the model implies that a consumer's sensitivity to changes in the losses or gains in an attribute is proportional to his or her sensitivity toward changes in the absolute levels of the attribute.
For this model to capture the existing evidence on choice set dependency, the reference point to which a product gets compared should be within the convex hull of the existing alternatives and be influenced by

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

871

the changes in the choice set. One such formulation is

where the comparison of any product's attribute level

to other products is modeled through the compari-

son of the attribute level to a reference point, which

is a weighted average of attribute levels in the choice

set. Therefore, the changes in the reference point of

attribute k for product j resulting from changes in

the other alternatives in the choice set is a weighted

average of the attribute-level changes in the choice set

xrj k =

j

j jk

xj k, where j  1

j-1 j+1 J .

The reference point formation is similar to that in

the model of Bodner and Prelec (2001), where it is

modeled to be the centroid of all products. Rather

than equal weights, I allow for flexible weights to

study the sensitivity of product line recommenda-

tions to the spillover effects induced by the existence

of comparable alternatives. The advantage of having

a reference point that is affected by each additional

product rather than being the midpoint of the range

as in Kivetz et al. (2004) is that it allows the model

to account for choice set-dependent comparisons aris-

ing from relative evaluations that do not necessarily

reflect on the range of attributes.

The common concept underlying the previously

proposed behavioral models for context effects has

been that consumers make relative evaluations within

a given context (Tversky and Simonson 1993, Bodner

and Prelec 2001, Kivetz et al. 2004). These relative

evaluations were modeled in different ways. Tversky

and Simonson (1993) suggest a tournament model in

which preference for a given product depends on the

attribute-level trade-offs with other products under

consideration. Bodner and Prelec (2001) propose that

such comparisons within a choice set can be summa-

rized by comparisons to a reference point. Kivetz et al.

(2004) propose and empirically test many alternative

models that capture context effects and find support

for the unireference point model over tournament-

based models. Because all of these models focus on

explaining choice reversals in local contexts, focusing

on only the relative evaluations to capture reversals

of ranking has been sufficient.

The current framework preserves the same intu-

ition, that consumers make relative judgements with-

in a context, in modeling relative evaluations with the

comparative valuations component. However, a key

difference is that the total valuation incorporates the

context-free absolute valuations as well as the choice

set-dependent comparative valuation. Having both

components allows for the importance of each com-

ponent to be determined by the particular domain,

rather than structurally imposing one component as

the only determinant of behavior. This separation was

suggested by Koszegi and Rabin (2006) for reference-

dependent preference structures in general.

Jointly accounting for these two components of valuations has several implications. First, consumers are allowed to attach a different value to a product when they make favorable comparisons versus when they make no comparisons. Second, the general preference framework inherently yields comparisons across three nested cases of choice set dependency, reference dependency, and the baseline model of valuations. Third, it incorporates a trade-off between the importance of comparisons versus absolute valuations. These implications will be particularly useful in incorporating the preference framework into a product line design problem and identifying the exact mechanism at play in the observed differences from the baseline model.
2.1. Workings of the Proposed Preference Framework
To examine how the proposed framework changes indifference curves of a hypothetical consumer, consider an example in which consumers have linear baseline valuations of attributes x and y and linear comparative valuations. In Figure 1, the linear indifference curves labeled with the letter A trace the trade-offs of a consumer with no sensitivity to deviations from the reference point. Such preferences can be captured by the absolute valuations alone, which is the baseline model. The indifference curves labeled B represent the same level of valuation as their A counterparts when the consumer is sensitive toward losses with respect to the reference point. When the consumer is sensitive to losses, his or her level of valuation is lower than or equal to that in the baseline case, where the consumer only cares about the absolute valuations. Therefore, the indifference curves labeled
Figure 1 Effects of Loss Parameters
y AB
B
A B A
R

Gain

Loss

Loss

Gain

x

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

872

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

Figure 2 Effects of Loss and Gain Parameters y

Figure 3

Preference Reversals Across Choice Sets Choice set 1

Attribute y

A

Gain

R

Loss

B

B

C

C

A

Loss

B

A

C A

Gain

x

with A envelope those labeled with B. Within regions in which the consumer perceives a loss in only one of the attributes, the consumer is more sensitive to the attribute he or she perceives a loss in, as the difference in the slopes across regions of gain and loss reflect.
If the degree of loss sensitivity is the same for both attributes, the indifference curve in the domain of losses in both attributes is parallel to the counterparts with no loss sensitivity. However, this does not need to be the case as depicted by the dashed line, an example of losses in attribute x being less important than the losses in attribute y.
Figure 2 depicts an example of how the indifference curves may appear when the consumer cares about both gains and losses with respect to the reference point while exhibiting loss aversion. The indifference curves labeled C illustrate how the valuation changes compared with the baseline model A or with a model that considers only loss sensitivity (B). The separation of gain sensitivity from the baseline absolute valuations allows for the relative standing of a product to have a bearing even when products are not in the loss domain for either attribute.
A particular preference reversal, as demonstrated in Figure 3, depicts how changing the choice set leads to unstable preferences. Consider two choice sets in which the position of the products, denoted as A and B, are the same across choice sets, but product H is shifted along the vertical dimension. Given the reference point in the first choice set, the consumer is indifferent between alternatives A and B. If preferences are choice set dependent, the reference point depicted in the first choice set is partially affected by the position of H. Therefore, a vertical shift in the position of H also moves the reference point along the

R

H

B

Choice set 2

Attribute x

A H
R

Attribute y

B
Attribute x
vertical dimension. As a result of the change in the position of H, ranking of alternatives A and B change, where A is preferred to B.3 The increase in alternative B's loss (in the vertical dimension) compared to the reference point decreases its utility. As a result of loss aversion, this decrease is larger than alternative A's utility reduction due to the same amount of decrease in its gain in the vertical dimension.
This framework links reference dependency and context dependency by allowing the reference point to be influenced by changes in the choice set. As a result,
3 The indifference curves trace all products in the continuous space of attributes x and y. If any consumption bundle were to affect the reference point, the indifference curves would not be piecewise linear. For demonstration simplicity, assume that only the products A, B, and H influence the reference point.

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

873

indifference curves may cross due to changes in the reference point across choice sets. This is how the model reconciles the evidence of preference reversals in the presence or absence of other options. The model is consistent with the evidence on context effects such as the extremeness aversion, asymmetric dominance, asymmetric advantage, enhancement, and detraction effects (Huber et al. 1982, Simonson and Tversky 1992). For further details, please see the appendix.

2.2. Specification of Valuations for

the Product Line Design Problem

Having a framework that captures consumers' choice

set-dependent behavior enables a firm to develop

suitable discriminating product line strategies. The

previous section presents a preference framework to

capture such behavior in its general form. The focus

of the paper is to study how choice set-dependent

preferences affect the design of a discriminatory prod-

uct line. To this end, for the analysis of the firm's

problem, I focus on consumer heterogeneity in pref-

erences for vertically differentiated alternatives.

In particular, I consider a firm providing products

that can be identified by a vertical dimension, which

can be quality. Consumers have heterogenous tastes

for the trade-off between price and quality that

the firm can exploit with an optimal product line

design. The heterogeneity in the vertical dimension is

modeled with two discrete segments: high-type con-

sumers, who have a high willingness to pay for qual-

ity, and low-type consumers. The low-type consumer

segment is identified with l and the high type with h.

I assume that the absolute valuation of a consumer

belonging to segment i  l, h for purchasing a product

of quality q and paying a price of p is iq - p, where is a segment-specific willingness-to-pay parameter

for quality. Because consumers in a given segment

have the same taste parameters, they either all buy a

product or none buy it. If a consumer does not pur-

chase one of the options in the product line, he or she

gets no utility.

Following the framework presented above, the

comparative valuations in the quality dimension can

be expressed as fq viq qj - viq qr



 =

q· q·

i qj - qrj i qj - qrj

if qj  qr if qj  qr

Similarly, for the price dimension, the comparative

valuations are fp vip pj - vip pr



- =-

p· p·

pj - prj pj - prj

if pj  pr if pj  pr

because the valuation of price is negative. The refer-
ence point for each product is assumed to be influenced by the other product dprl /dph = h, dprh/dpl = l,

dqrl /dqh = h, dqrh/dql = l, where 0  h l h l  1.4 The reference point is assumed to be in the
convex hull of the offered products' attributes. This assumption ensures that the regions of gain and loss are determined by the local comparisons as long as these consumers are served with two products. It focuses the attention to product positioning decisions when local context effects are salient. However, to the extent that the reference point remains within the convex hull, the weights are allowed to be smaller than one to study how the relative weight of an internal reference point versus an external reference point would affect the optimal positioning of the product line.
If high-type consumers purchase the high-end product (qh ph) and low-type consumers purchase the low-end product (ql pl), they get the following valuations:

Uh qh ph qrh prh = hqh - ph + q h qh - qrh

- p ph - prh

(1)

Ul ql pl qrl prl = lql - pl - q l qrl - ql

+ p prl - pl

(2)

Obviously, preferences change with the domain of losses or gains in which the product lies in. For example, if the low-type segment consumed the high-end product, the valuation would be of a different form than in Equation (2):

Ul qh ph qrh prh = lqh - ph + q l qh - qrh - p ph - prh

In a sorting equilibrium, high-type consumers purchase the high-end product and low-type consumers purchase the low-end product. To ensure this selfselection, the firm has to price the products accordingly while choosing the most profitable quality provisions.

3. Model: Setup of the Product Line
Design Problem
In designing the optimal product line, the firm offers a menu of products to the extent that these products profitably induce consumers to self-select into

4 The product's own effect on the reference point to which it gets compared is abstracted away from; i.e., dkri /dki = 0. The reference point could alternatively be the weighted average of all products in the menu including the product itself. This would result in the same reference point for all the products, which may be attractive in some applications. This is allowed in the preference framework outlined in the previous section. Allowing for positive weights is unattractive for purposes of comparison across different models of product line design because the changes in the attributes of a given product alone would also affect the reference point to which it is compared. Therefore, for the purposes of clarity in demonstration, this assumption is used. Note that this assumption does not change the results presented herein.

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

874

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

the product intended for their segment. Given a preference structure that satisfies the sorting condition,5 the setup of the product line design can be obtained directly from the existing literature (e.g., Moorthy 1984). The firm maximizes profits while ensuring that it sets prices, such that (1) each segment of consumers will buy the product intended for that segment (incentive compatibility constraints), and (2) each segment that was intended to purchase a product actually does so (individual rationality constraints). The profits of the firm can be described as

max
ql qh

l pl - c ql

+ h ph - c qh

(3)

where i is the proportion of the segment i  l h and c q is the marginal cost of providing quality q. The
marginal cost function is assumed to be twice differ-
entiable and strictly convex. The prices in equilibrium ph and pl are determined by the individual rationality (IR) constraint for low-type consumers and the
incentive compatibility (IC) constraint for high-type
consumers. Only the IC constraint for high-type con-
sumers and the IR constraint for low-type consumers
bind in equilibrium, as shown in the appendix. The
IR constraint for the low-type consumer segment is

Ul ql pl qrl prl  0  l ql - q qrl - ql - pl + p prl - pl  0 (4)

and the IC constraint for the high type is

Uh qh ph qrh prh  Uh ql pl qrl prl  h qh + q qh - qrh - ph - p ph - prh  h ql - q qrl - ql - pl + p prl - pl (5)

In the next section, I demonstrate how product line design strategies change as a result of taking the importance of comparisons in consumer valuations into account. I consider two distinct ways in which the proposed framework differs from the baseline model, which is the product line design problem when consumers only care about the absolute valuation.
The first way a model with comparative valuations is different from the baseline model is the fact that the sensitivity to an attribute depends not only on the

5 I consider the parameter values such that the preference ordering of different segments for the products is the same across domains of gain and loss. This sorting condition puts an upper bound on the relative importance of sensitivity to comparisons:
l 1 + q 1 + p < h 1 + q 1 + p . In other words, high-type consumers should always have a higher observed willingness to pay for quality than low-type consumers across all domains. This assumption focuses the analysis to those regions of comparison parameters such that a firm naively using the baseline model would also observe the same ordering of types.

consumer segment-specific taste parameter i but also on the domain on which the product's attribute level lies with respect to the reference point. This loss and gain domain (or reference) specificity holds regardless of whether the reference point is completely external or fully determined by the choice set under consideration. This particular difference from the baseline model with standard preferences is labeled as reference dependency.
The second way in which this model is different than the baseline model is that the reference point to which each attribute level gets compared is influenced by the alternatives in the choice set. Therefore, the positions of all products in a product line influence the shape of the indifference curves. This explains how indifference curves may cross different choice sets. I refer to choice set dependency as the fact that preferences depend on the choice set due to the effect of the choice set in local comparisons. In this framework, choice set dependency operates through reference dependency.
4. The Design and Analysis of the Optimal Product Line
Although choice set dependency is needed to capture the behavioral evidence of local context effects, I present the mechanism of reference dependence independently to separate its outcome from the baseline model even when the choice set does not influence comparisons. The first motivation for this exercise is to show that even if the reference point is exogenously determined, considering comparative valuations changes the equilibrium prices and the quality provision in the market. The second motivation is to lay the groundwork for an analysis of the separation of the outcomes related only to reference dependency from the dependencies across product positions induced by choice set dependency.
4.1. Optimal Product Line Design with Reference-Dependent Preferences
The distinction between how much the reference point can be influenced by local product attributes versus how much is out of the firm's control is crucial in distinguishing the mechanism of reference dependency from the additional effects that arise due to choice set dependency. To focus on reference dependency, assume for now that the reference point is completely external to the choice set.
As outlined in §3, the IR constraint of low-type consumers (Equation (4)) and the IC constraint of high-type consumers (Equation (5)) bind in equilibrium. They are repeated here for convenience. The IR

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

875

constraint and the IC constraint pose the following restrictions on the prices that can be charged:

l ql - q qrl - ql - pl + p prl - pl = 0 h qh + q qh - qrh - ph - p ph - prh = h ql - q qrl - ql - pl + p prl - pl

Therefore, the prices charged in equilibrium are

ph =

pl =

l ql -

q qrl - ql 1+ p

+

p prl

h qh + q qh - qrh - h - l ql - q qrl - ql 1+ p

(6) + pprh
(7)

These prices reflect the understanding that the high

type's preference structure is dependent on the product he or she consumes. The IC constraint reflects that

consuming the product targeted to the high-type con-

sumer leaves the consumer in the loss domain for

prices and gain domain for quality, whereas consuming the low-end product leaves the high-type con-

sumer in the loss domain in quality and gain domain

in prices. The deviation strategy for the high-type

consumer (choosing the low-end product) decreases in its attractiveness as the reference quality level qrl increases and/or the loss sensitivity in quality q increases. High-type consumers' effective quality sen-
sitivity versus price sensitivity is higher in the case

of deviation. This realization allows the firm to sat-

isfy the IC constraint with less information rent to the

high type. The equilibrium quality provisions, which follow

from the first-order conditions of the firm's maximiza-

tion problem, consequently internalize the change in

the preference structure of the high-type consumer in

the case of deviation:

c

ql

1+ = 1+

q p

l-

h 1+ q l 1+ p

h- l

(8)

c

qh

1+ = 1+

q p

h

(9)

When there are no fixed costs of offering a product and when the firm wants to sell to both segments, it serves each segment with a distinct product as c qh > c ql for all parameter values. The distortion6 to the quality provision for type l consumers due to the IC constraint achieves the proper selection under these preferences. Because of the changes in the comparisons in the case of deviation, the distortion of quality of the low-end product is greater than it would have been if the firm did not consider reference dependency.

6 The term "distortion" refers to the discrepancy of the quality provision from which this segment would have been served had it been the only segment in the market.

Proposition 1. A firm that considers the reference dependency of preferences will provide a lower quality to the low-type consumers compared to a naive firm that observes the same consumers. Both firms offer the same quality to the high-type consumers.

Proof. The naive firm observes consumer segments' sensitivity to quality versus price, Ul/ ql =
l 1 + q / 1 + p and Uh/ qh = h 1 + q / 1 + p , yet assumes that sensitivities are only type specific. The
IR constraint for the low type and the IC constraint
for the high type in such a setting are, respectively,

Ul ql pl  0 

1+ l1+

q ql - pl  0
p

Uh qh ph  Uh ql pl



1+ h1+

q qh - ph 
p

1+ h1+

q ql - pl
p

It can be seen that the IC constraint implies the same effective trade-offs between quality and price in the case of deviation as in the case of purchasing the intended product. The resulting naive quality choices that maximize profits while satisfying these constraints are

1+ c ql = 1 +

q l-
p

h l

1+ h1+

q-
p

1+ l1+

q p

c

qh

1+ = 1+

q p

h

Such a naive firm will lack the understanding that relative quality sensitivities may change for choices that are out of equilibrium. The firm believes that the local trade-offs, Ul/ ql and Uh/ qh,7 apply for every choice occasion regardless of the relative standing of products. Although out-of-equilibrium choices will not be observed under successful discrimination, attribute sensitivities in the case of deviation are relevant for extracting the most surplus from the consumers due to the IC constraint. Because the high-type consumers would be in the loss domain when purchasing the low-end product, their effective quality sensitivity in the case of deviation is larger than in the case of purchasing the high-end product.

7 Note that these sensitivities are different than l and h, respectively. Because in the standard case the firm operates with a model that assumes that consumers do not value comparisons, we need to be careful not to inject differences across models due to differences in parametrization. For example, we do not want to cause an increase in the quality sensitivity of the low type as a result of allowing for reference dependency in preferences. This standardization allows for proper comparisons across different levels of firm sophistication. One can interpret these sensitivities as the naive trade-offs the firm would infer from observing choice data resulting from small local changes in attributes.

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

876

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

The downward distortion to the low-type segment's quality provision increases in this sensitivity. The firm that considers reference dependency can more effectively prevent the high-type consumer from deviating by distorting the low-end product.
The high-type consumers' quality provision is the same regardless of whether a firm considers reference dependency or not. This is because the high-type consumer's optimal product position does not depend on the valuations of the low-type segment because the IC constraint only binds downward.
This proposition underlines how the existence of comparative valuations, even with an external reference point, interacts with the discrimination incentives of the firm. In addition to reference dependency, if the comparisons within a product line matter, consumers' valuations will then depend on what other segments are offered and new dependencies between product offerings will emerge. I will discuss these dependencies next.
4.2. Optimal Product Line Design with Choice Set-Dependent Preferences
In a typical product line design problem, to achieve the most profitable discrimination, the firm needs to manage the cannibalization within the product line. This consideration leads to dependencies across product positions, resulting in distortions to the quality provided to all consumer segments except for the one with the highest valuation for quality. The distortion to the low-end quality provision when consumers have reference-dependent preferences is of the same discriminatory nature.
In the case of consumers with choice set-dependent valuations, the firm has other reasons to distort quality. If consumers have choice set-dependent preferences, they make comparisons not only between a product and an external reference point but also within the choice set. Because the valuation for each product depends on the position and existence of the other products, each product in the product line creates an externality on the valuation of other products through comparisons. The firm internalizes such dependencies across alternatives in the consumers' decision of picking one product.8 Thus, such context management considerations lead to further distortions
8 This model focuses on the effects of choice set-dependent preferences where each consumer purchases and consumes one product. However, other types of dependencies among preferences for products arise in the choice of multi-item assortments. Previous work on multi-item decisions shares a similar modeling approach to the current work because the models account for dependencies across items in the set of choices. Dependencies in evaluating a bundle choice have been captured in the balance model (Farquhar and Rao 1976) by allowing for interactions between components of a bundle of products to influence the valuation of the bundle. Subsequent research (Bradlow and Rao 2000, Chung and Rao 2003)

across product position choices. These distortions are beyond those induced by pure discrimination motives and may be in the opposing direction. I refer to these types of distortions as spillover effects among the products in a product line.
Definition 1. Spillover effects are quality distortions in a product line caused by the firm's context management considerations.
When the firm realizes that the comparisons among products can be managed, it views the reference quality and reference price points in the relevant IR and IC constraints (Equations (4) and (5)) as decision variables. Therefore, the resulting equilibrium prices are functions of one another. For example, because the low-end price will depend not only on the low-end quality but also on the reference quality and reference price, the high-end quality provision and price will affect it. Therefore, dpl/dqh = pl/ qrl qrl / qh +
pl/ prl prl / ph dph/dqh , whereas it would be equal to zero without choice set dependency. Similarly, the effect of the high-end quality on the high-end price will not only depend on the valuation of quality but also on the effects of comparisons in quality and price,

dph = ph + ph qrl + ph prh

dqh

qh

qrl qh

prh pl

pl qrl + pl prl dph qrl qh prl ph dqh

which the high-end quality provisions may influence directly and indirectly. These derivatives speak to how the firm internalizes the externality that each product's quality level exerts on the surplus that can be extracted from the other product. I show that the internalization of comparisons across products results in quality distortions above and beyond those caused by discrimination motives.

Proposition 2. The equilibrium quality provisions when consumers exhibit choice set-dependent preferences are such that

c

qh

=

1+

p

1 1+ p -

p

hp

l

·

h 1+ q

1+ p+

l ph

h

-qh l

l 1+ p + p l
h

-

h- l

1+ p+

l ph

h

extended the modeling of bundle choice and studied the optimal product assortment in response to such dependencies arising from demand complementarity across products. Complementarities among products have been incorporated into multivariate discretechoice models by allowing for cross-effects to account for such dependencies (see, e.g., Manchanda et al. 1999, Song and Chintagunta 2006; also, see Seetharaman et al. 2005 for an overview).

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

877

c

ql

=

1+

p

1 1+ p -

p

h

p

l

· 1+ q l 1+ p + h p l
l

- h 1+ p + p h
l

· h- l 1+ q + h q l

and reduce back to those implied by reference dependency alone when the reference point is not endogenous to the choice set; i.e., h = 0, l = 0, h = 0, l = 0.
Proof. Derivation of equilibrium quality provisions follow directly from the differentiation of
i i pi - c qi with respect to qi. Complete details are presented in the appendix.
Corollary 1. The following observations on equilibrium quality provisions hold
1. The equilibrium quality provisions exhibit spillover effects due to choice set dependency;
a. Distortions at the top: If p > 0 and h > 0, there exists a positive distortion to qh. If q > 0 and h > 0, there exists a negative distortion to qh.
b. Distortions at the bottom: If q > 0 and l > 0, there exists a negative distortion to ql. If p > 0 and l > 0, there exists a positive distortion to ql.
2. These distortions increase in the importance of the relevant comparison, influence of the product on the reference point, and the size and the relative quality price trade-off of the segment that benefits from the distortion.
Proof. Spillover effects can be identified by comparing these implicit functions of quality provisions to those implied by reference dependency alone in Equations (8) and (9).
A surprising result of the model is the existence of distortions at the top. With just the same baseline absolute valuation specification used in this model, distortion at the top would never be observed as a result of discrimination motives alone. In fact, the finding that the highest-valuation consumer always gets the same quality product regardless of the existence of other segments is an important characteristic of results obtained in the previous literature. However, because of choice set dependency and the firm's incentives to internalize the externalities between products, the high-end quality provision in equilibrium is not independent of other types' valuations. These types of dependencies, referred to as spillovers, operate throughout the product line, not just at the top. These spillovers may go against the distortions due to discrimination motives. The overall effect of the spillovers on each quality provision is ambiguous. I discuss these spillover effects in detail and provide conditions for directional results.

4.2.1. Discussion of Spillover Effects. When distorting a segment's quality provision, the firm trades off profits from that segment versus the segment, whose comparative valuation it manages by the particular distortion. For ease of exposition in identifying and discussing spillover effects, I consider comparisons in each dimension separately and compare these quality provisions to those generated only by reference dependency.
Comparisons in the Quality Dimension. If consumers only care about comparisons in the quality dimension, the quality distortions compared to no consideration of choice set dependency (i.e., l =
h = 0) can be readily seen by comparing the following to Equations (8) and (9):

c ql = 1 + q

l- h

h- l

-

h hq l

l

l

c qh = h 1 + q - 1 l - h h q h
h

In particular, the gain sensitivity q distorts the lowend quality downward above and beyond the distortion stemming from discrimination considerations. This results from the fact that decreasing the reference quality increases the price the firm can charge for the high-end product. This spillover effect increases in the proportion of type h consumers and their marginal value for quality. The loss sensitivity in quality q imposes a negative spillover on the high-end quality provision. The firm realizes that by decreasing the high-end quality, it can extract more rent from the type l consumer for the product he or she consumes in equilibrium. However, to the extent that the firm can make the reference quality higher, it can make deviation less attractive for the high type and extract a higher rent from this segment. However, it is more profitable to increase rent extracted from the low type than to minimize the information rent induced by the IC constraint. Therefore, l - h h is positive because we consider a case in which the type l consumer segment has enough valuation for the product to make separation a profitable policy. Therefore, the high-end quality provision is distorted downward.

Comparisons in the Price Dimension. On the other hand, if consumers only care about comparisons in the price dimension, the price that can be charged to each type in turn depends on the prices charged to other types, as seen in the IR and IC conditions above. The prices for each segment are increasing in the reference price, and the optimal quality provisions

c ql = l 1+ p +

h/ l p l - h/ l 1+ p + p h 1+ p 1+ p - p h p l

c

qh

=

h 1+ p + 1+ p 1+ p

l/ -

h p

ph hpl

h- l

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

878

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

reflect the positive feedback of increasing a product's price on the price that can be extracted from the segment that buys the other product. Therefore, the firm provides higher quality and thus higher-priced goods in equilibrium than it would if there were no choice set dependencies; i.e., h = l = 0. The amount of distortion to each product provision because of this context management motive depends on the relative sizes of segments h/ l as well as the influence of each product on the other product's reference price h and l, which is a measure of the degree of choice set dependency. In particular, as the effect of the highend product's price on the reference price increases and/or the low-type segment size increases, the firm has more incentive to increase the price of the highend product by offering a higher quality. Similarly, the upward distortion to the low-end product will be higher if the high-type segment is larger in size and if the firm can influence the reference price by changing the low-end product's price. Because of the trade-off between the profitability from a given segment and its spillover effect on the other segment's profitability, the degree of upward quality distortion to either segment increases in that segment's marginal value of quality.
The firm also has an additional downward distortion incentive for the low-type segment's quality provision. Because of the deviation strategy becoming less appealing for the high type, the high-end price is higher for lower values of ql, which introduces the usual downward distortion to the low-end quality. Moreover, this incentive to distort now is much stronger because of the existence of comparisons in the price dimension. The higher the high-end price, the more profits the firm can extract from the lowend consumers because of more favorable comparisons in price. Therefore, this feedback loop puts a bigger downward pressure on the low-end quality.
The denominator 1 + p 1 + p - p h p l enters the optimal quality provisions as a result of the feedback loop each price has on the other price because of prices affecting the reference price. As the choice set dependency increases (in other words, as h and
l get bigger), this denominator decreases, leading to a greater positive feedback loop. Thus, this multiplier on the previous spillover effects leads to further increases in quality provisions.
Interaction of Comparisons in Both Dimensions. When consumers care about comparisons in both dimensions and the comparisons can be influenced by the products, some distortions are increased because of the interaction of spillover effects from different comparisons while others are softened. When consumers care about the gains in both dimensions, the existence of p increases the downward distortions because of q on the low-end quality provision. This

is because the downward distortion in ql leads to an increase in the high type's quality gain and thus to a higher ph. A higher ph makes the comparison in prices even more favorable for the low-end segment and thus increases the price that can be extracted. Therefore, the coexistence of sensitivity to gains in price and to gains in quality provides the firm even more incentives to distort the low-end quality provision.
Recall that qh is distorted downward because of the firm's incentive to decrease the losses in quality for the low-type consumer. If consumers also care about comparisons in price among products, two interaction effects of context management considerations arise. On one hand, if the low-end price point affects the reference price for the high-end consumers who are in losses in that dimension, then the firm has even more incentive to distort qh downward. Because a lower qh will generate more favorable quality comparisons for the low-end consumers, the price that can be extracted from them for a given quality level increases. This, in turn, leads to the high-end consumers' reference price increasing, which increases the price that can then be extracted from this segment. This positive feedback loop leads the firm to distort the high-end quality more when both loss aversion in prices as well as loss aversion in quality are prevalent. On the other hand, distorting the highend quality downward decreases the quality reference for the high-end consumer in the case of deviation, which decreases the price that can be extracted from the high-end consumer. Because the price that can be extracted from the low-end segment increases in the reference price and a higher ph will generate a higher reference price, the firm has fewer incentives to distort qh downward to increase the low type's utility because an opposing comparison effect exists from the sensitivity to gains in prices. Overall, the total interaction effect of the existence of sensitivity to price comparisons on the distortion because of loss aversion in quality depends on the loss aversion in prices, and its magnitude is determined by l p l - h - l ·
l/ h p h.
4.2.2. Directional Results of Spillover Effects-- Comparative Statics. The impact of considering choice set-dependent preferences in designing the product line goes beyond those that may result from changes in the differentiation between segments, as seen in the comparison between the baseline model and extended model. These structural changes in the way the firm thinks about dependencies across products results in novel implications for the product line.
The overall impact of the spillovers on quality provisions is ambiguous. The comparisons in the price dimension lead to an increase in the quality levels of both products. The comparisons in the quality dimension lead to a decrease in the quality levels of

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

879

both products. For a given segment's quality provision, loss and gain sensitivities result in spillovers of opposing directions. The relative importance of different spillover considerations depends on the relative sizes of the affected segments, their relative absolute valuations with respect to each other, and the potential of a product to influence the reference point.
The fact that the impact of gain sensitivities on the quality provisions in the market may be greater than the effect of loss sensitivities is a surprising result because gain sensitivities are by assumption smaller than loss sensitivities. This result highlights the need to consider gain sensitivities separately from absolute valuations.

Corollary 2 (Compression Effect). Spillover considerations lead to a compression in the equilibrium quality range when loss aversion in the comparative valuation of either attribute is sufficiently large.

Proof. Please see the appendix for the

derivation.

The difference between the high-end and low-end

quality provisions, compared to the difference in the

absence of choice set-dependent preferences, de-

creases in the loss sensitivity and increases in the gain

sensitivity in either dimension. In particular, if com-

parisons are made only on the quality dimension dis-

tortions because of spillover effects alone will decrease

the range of quality provisions if h q l h is larger than l q h l - h h . If the consumers care only
about the price comparisons, loss aversion in prices

will lead to compression when p l/ p h > l h -

h l/

l

2 h

.

Clearly,

when

there

is

no

sensitivity

to

gains, the existence of comparative valuations always

leads to compression.

In the case of severe loss aversion in the quality

dimension, the firm may find it optimal to serve both

segments with the same product and not discriminate

among consumers.

Corollary 3 (Pooling Effect). If the loss aversion in quality is large enough, it will be profitable for the firm not to separate highest-value consumers from other types. The degree of loss aversion in quality necessary to induce pooling decreases in the loss aversion in prices.

Proof. The firm will serve both types with the same product if

q h l + h l b + w - hw - q h l + l hw  hw - h l b + w w= h+ h p+ l p h b= l+ l p+ h p l
This follows directly from the condition c qh - c ql  0, as presented in the appendix.

Serving both segments with the same product, i.e., pooling, is profitable for the firm when the profit loss because of unfavorable quality comparisons made by low-type consumers is greater than the additional profits obtained by discrimination.9 An increase in the loss aversion in prices, through its interaction with the loss aversion in quality, makes pooling more appealing.
That a firm would forego the possibility to discriminate even when the absolute valuations makes discrimination a profitable proposition otherwise10 is a surprising finding in the light of previous literature. On the other hand, it is intuitive that the firms trade off the discrimination motives with context management motives and thus end up creating a negative spillover of the high-end product onto the valuation of the lowtype consumer for the low-end product. This intuition that generates pooling at the top extends to markets with more than two types of consumers.
These results are novel recommendations for the product line design that deviate from recommendations stemming from the baseline model in a fundamental way. These effects have also not been captured in the behavioral literature because they involve discrimination motives and concern the position of products relative to each other rather than the inclusion or exclusion of alternatives. The model that generates these results can also speak to the decision of which products to include in the product line given a specific cost function for quality. Next, I will discuss the implications for the number of products in the product line and how the model's primitives relate to a choice between different strategies.
4.3. Implications for Number of Products Thus far, I have considered effects of context management considerations on the positions of products when the firm finds it profitable to serve both segments in equilibrium. The firm decides on product positions conditional on finding that serving both segments with different products is in fact the best strategy. However, because the firm can also manage comparative valuations through the decision of which products to carry, it is important to consider the strategies that pertain to the identity of segments served and the number of products offered.
Pooling at the top decreases the number of products in the market, leaving the identity of segments
9 This analysis is made under the assumption that the firm still finds it best to serve both segments rather than just the high-type consumers. If the loss aversion in quality is high but the type l consumer segment is small, the firm may find that it is best not to serve the type l consumer segment at all.
10 Please see Salant (1989) and Anderson (2005) for conditions on demand and cost functions when the firm may not find it profitable to discriminate.

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

880

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

served the same. However, it is possible that the firm serves different sets of consumers with the sole intention to manage considerations. Such strategies aim to augment the value of products consumed for the key segments by manipulating the existence of other products. Because the profits are increasing in the reference price and decreasing in the reference quality, such "augmentation effects" will push the reference price up and the reference quality down. Whether the firm trims or extends the product line and in which direction depends on the relative degree of sensitivity toward comparisons in each attribute, the size and responsiveness of the beneficiary consumer segments, and costs of product introduction. These trade-offs are readily seen from the profits based on the equilibrium prices in Equations (6) and (7).
For example, note that the profits from serving both segments rather than only the high-end segment is increasing in the reference price and decreasing in the reference quality. If loss aversion in prices is high and the low-end product contributes largely to the comparisons that the high-end consumers make, the firm may stop serving the low-type consumer segment altogether. When loss aversion in prices is high, and the firm finds it profitable to serve the low-end consumer, we know that the low-end quality increases in the price loss sensitivity. However, when choice set dependency makes the low-end product's existence more costly for the profits that can be extracted from the high type, the firm may actually drop this product all together and not serve the low-end segment instead of serving it with a higher quality to mitigate its negative externality. Thus, there is a discontinuity in the direction of distortion at the low end. Alternatively, the firm can alleviate the high type's sensitivity to losses in price by introducing a premium product. This product would serve a segment with an even higher taste for quality that was not profitable to serve otherwise because of costs of product introduction. Whether the firm will eliminate the low-end product or introduce a premium product (or both) to manage the losses in price for the high type will depend on the relative profitability of high and low segments as well as the fixed costs of product introduction. Similarly, when comparisons in the quality dimension are substantial, the firm can decrease the quality reference either by pooling at the top as demonstrated before or by extending the product line at the bottom.
Extensions at the top and at the bottom resonate with the compromise effect that demonstrates a preference to avoid options on either extremity of the product line. Although this is an intuitive recommendation, because of considerations of discrimination and costs, extensions may not always be the optimal strategy. The firm may prefer to keep the number of products the same or even to trim, depending on

the particular cost function. The model above contains all the incentives that factor in the trade-off between alternative strategies. The analysis in this paper focuses on changes in the structure of a product line of a certain target consumer base, to understand how recommendations differ from those of either considering only discrimination motives or taking experimental studies on context effects as strategy recommendations. Given a particular cost function, it can also be used to evaluate alternative strategies of augmentation effects. Whether the firm modifies the position of products for a given set of consumers or decides to change the consumer segments, its targets will depend on the firm's exact cost conditions and the distribution of consumers.
5. General Discussion
The model's assumptions simplify the marketplace to make the underlying structure clear. However, in providing strategy recommendations to real firms or in analyzing data from the marketplace, it will be necessary to allow for further flexibility. For example, although the preference model allows for the reference points to be influenced by factors other than the choice set, it does not allow them to lie outside the convex hull of the choice set because I focus on cases where within choice set comparisons are of primary interest. However, reference points may be influenced by prior experience, expectations, and aspirations among other factors. In an empirical application, it is important to allow for the reference point to be influenced by external factors as well as by the choice set itself, and to study the existence and the relative importance of any type of comparisons consumers make. Empirical research on price comparisons depending on prior experience and expectations has produced mixed evidence. Hardie et al. (1993) find evidence for loss aversion in prices when prices deviate from their expected means. However, Bell and Lattin (2000) argue that the loss aversion effects may disappear when consumer heterogeneity is controlled for. Recently, Klapper et al. (2005) have shown that the degree of loss aversion can be explained by consumer characteristics. It would be worthwhile to empirically examine how the prior experience of prices affects choice when allowing for context-dependent reference prices.
The preference framework can be used to estimate a discrete-choice model to investigate the magnitude and effect of choice set dependency. The ideal data set would include the consumer-level response to changes in the attributes or the price of a product across different choice sets. The variance in the choice sets across purchase occasions or locations should be exogenous to the preferences of consumers and

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

881

be of the magnitude such that the consumers realize the change in the consideration set. In the case of vertically differentiated products, it is important to account for how the target consumer groups change as choice set changes. Therefore, it may be beneficial to track a long panel of consumers facing different choice sets on different occasions. In general, the estimation needs to account for both the change in the selection of consumers across products as a result of an alteration to the choice set and the change in their preferences.
An implied assumption in the model is that the consideration set and the choice set are the same. Although this assumption is realistic in light of the current model, it excludes other questions such as how the intensity of comparisons within the choice set varies with the number of products or whether comparisons to products closer in the attribute space matter more than the whole range. It is clear that the consumers will have different processes of comparisons in a choice set of a hundred products versus a choice set of two or three products. Moreover, it rules out the question of whether the firm should introduce a dominated alternative that no consumer would consider buying. The model concentrates on the choice set where local comparisons take place. Therefore, in an empirical setting, one needs to pay attention to the implications of having a larger choice set than the consideration set.
Recent research shows that increasing the number of alternatives offered may lead to less choice (Dhar 1997, Tversky and Shafir 1992, Chernev 2003, Iyengar and Lepper 2000) and lower revenues (Boatwright and Nunes 2001). Even though the number of products is an important consideration in product line design, I abstract away from the possible interaction of this phenomenon with context management. Considering choice overload may have interesting implications, but Gourville and Soman (2005) show that increased variety along a single, compensatory dimension does not result in increased propensity of no choice. Gourville and Soman (2005) find that variety that is vertically differentiated on one attribute dimension, such as the case studied in this paper is not subject to the choice overload problem.
The model concentrates on one type of heterogeneity, namely, differences among consumer segments in the trade-off between price and quality. This approach focuses the study on the effect of choice set dependency on the design of discriminatory product lines. Other orthogonal forms of heterogeneity among consumers, such as horizontal, will not affect these results, and many dimensions of such heterogeneity may be allowed for in an applied investigation. The model also assumes that there is no heterogeneity across consumers in their sensitivity to comparisons, beyond allowing comparative valuations to be

stronger for people who also have strong preferences for that attribute. If heterogeneity in comparison sensitivity is unrelated to consumer types, the model's predictions will not change. However, if for example the high-type consumers care only about comparisons in quality and the low-type consumers care only about comparisons in price, the model predictions should be calibrated accordingly. For a discussion of using more than one dimension of heterogeneity for discrimination in a product line design problem with standard preferences and an extension of relaxing this assumption, the reader is referred to Desai (2001) and Armstrong (1996).
The paper focuses on how the strategies of a single firm will change in response to consumer behavior stemming from choice set-dependent preferences. In doing so, it abstracts away from the complications that competition would bring to the equilibrium outcomes. The effect of competition on pricing the product line has been an active topic (please see Moorthy 1988, Shugan 1989, Stole 1995, Villas-Boas and Schmidt-Mohr 1999, Villas-Boas 1999, Desai 2001, Armstrong and Vickers 2001, and references therein). Future work can incorporate dependencies in demand into models of product line competition.
Abstracting away from competition results in a further restriction that the comparisons among the products of the same firm are the only ones that define the context. The reference point can be extended to account for competitors' products without any directional changes to the presented results, as long as the internal reference point is assumed to be important enough such that the composite reference point lies in the convex hull of the product under consideration. This implies, for example, that the firm's lowest-quality product will always be perceived to be in the loss domain for quality when consumers make comparisons within the larger choice set. This will happen if the effect of the competitors' products on the reference point is relatively low. Otherwise, the gain and loss domains for the firm's products will be determined by the competitors' products, and domains have to be specified before product line design is undertaken. More strategic placement recommendations can be derived for the particular domain in which the competitors' products place the firm's products.
Another approach to capturing the evidence on context effects is to model the behavioral reasoning behind them. Unfortunately, very different explanations for different context effects have been proposed, ranging from a perceptual-based explanation by Dhar and Glazer (1996), which posits that the existence of other products changes the judgements of similarity between options, to Wernerfelt (1995) and Kamenica (2008), which reconciles evidence on the compromise

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

882

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

effect with an explanation based on an asymmetric information setup in which consumers can infer the product that is most suitable for them on the basis of what the firm offers. Alternatively, Prelec et al. (1997) show that the compromise effect can be explained only in part by what the consumers infer from the product line about what a suitable product is. I consider the dependencies between products beyond those induced by informational value of the product line. In focusing only on the existence of comparative valuations, I completely abstract from potential signalling aspects of the product line such as the positive signal of a scarce product (Stock and Balachander 2005), the negative signal of a productline extension in terms of the quality of products offered (Randall and Reibstein 1998), or the negative quality signal of targeted price points rather than a single price (Anderson and Simester 2001).
6. Conclusion
I present a model of optimal product line strategies based on a psychologically richer model of consumer behavior that accounts for how preferences may change across choice sets. The model provides evidence that choice set-dependent preferences can lead to marketplace outcomes that are distinct. It demonstrates the importance of accounting for such preferences rather than projecting local trade-offs in attributes to other regions of gain and loss. The decisions of how to position products and which segments to serve involve trade-offs between discrimination motives and the strength of context management incentives for each segment. Therefore, the model can produce surprising results such as the dominance of spillovers that aim to increase gains over those that aim to decrease losses on the market quality provisions, even when all consumers care about losses more than gains. By providing insights into the specific forces at play in the equilibrium outcome of number of products and their positions, the model offers a useful decision tool for managers facing particular market conditions.
It is my hope that this paper creates more thought on incorporating the evidence on consumer behavior into the strategic reasoning of firms to develop more accurate models to analyze welfare effects of market outcomes and provide better managerial recommendations.
Acknowledgments This project originated from the author's doctoral dissertation at the University of California, Berkeley. The author is indebted to dissertation advisors J. Miguel Villas-Boas and Richard Gilbert for their guidance and support. The author has greatly benefited from the comments of the editor, area editor, and reviewers, and discussions with

Florian Zettelmeyer, Teck-Hua Ho, Dan Ariely, Benjamin Hermalin, and Peter Rossi. For their helpful comments, the author thanks seminar participants at Duke University, Stanford University, New York University, Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Yale University, London Business School, HEC, University of Toronto, Northwestern University, University of Wisconsin, University of Minnesota, University of Texas at Dallas, Emory University, University of Maryland, University of Rochester, and Washington University. The author also thanks the Kilts Center for Marketing at the University of Chicago for its financial support.
Appendix
A.1. Capturing Documented Local Context Effects The reference point will be picked as the centroid for consistency across the demonstrations below. The preference reversals arise from the directional change in the reference point as we focus in on these demonstrations. However, the extent and magnitude of such effects may depend on the position of the reference point. In further empirical studies, the formation of the reference point can be addressed.
A.1.a. Asymmetric Dominance and Asymmetric Advantage. Figure A.1 depicts asymmetric dominance and advantage effects. The fact that option B fares better in the choice set of {A B D} than in the choice set of {A B} is an example of asymmetric dominance effect. The way that the presented framework captures this effect is through modeling how the addition of D changes the reference point, depicted as from R1 to R2 and allowing for loss aversion. Option B fares better compared to R2 than compared to R1, and this valuation increase is more favorable than the change to the valuation of option A as a result of the same change. Therefore, the relative share of option B increases.
On the other hand, the fact that option A fares better in the choice set of {A B E} than in the choice set of {A B} is an example of asymmetric advantage effect. Similarly, the addition of E changes the reference point as depicted from R1 to R2. This reduces the perceived losses in attribute x associated with the purchase of A and increases the perceived losses in attribute y associated with purchasing B, leading to a preference reversal.
A.1.b. Extremeness Aversion. Simonson and Tversky (1992) label the finding that middle options fare better than extreme options as extremeness aversion. If both attributes exhibit extremeness aversion, then this effect is called compromise effect. If only one attribute exhibits extremeness aversion, then the phenomenon is called polarization. The proposed framework can incorporate both effects, respectively, when both attributes exhibit loss aversion or when only one does. In fact, this framework can capture a continuum of relative importance of loss and gain sensitivities for the two attributes. Figure A.2 demonstrates an example of compromise effect, where option L is preferred to option M when the choice set is {K L M} and option M is preferred to option L when the choice set is {L M N}. The reference point can be anywhere within the convex hull of the alternatives, which is the line represented by options {K L M} in the first choice set and the line represented by options {L M N} in the second choice set. For simplicity, R1 and R2

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

883

Figure A.1 Asymmetric Dominance and Asymmetric Advantage

Figure A.2 Compromise Effect

Attribute y

Attribute y

A

K

R1 R2 B D

L R1
R2 M
N

Attribute y

E A
R2 R1

Attribute x B

Attribute x
depict the reference points for choice sets {K L M} and {L M N}, respectively. The addition of N and the deletion of K makes the reference point move closer to option M and away from option L. If loss aversion is relatively similar on both attributes, we see a preference reversal as the consumer prefers to incur a very small loss (or none at all) in one dimension and a very small gain in another around the reference point R1 rather than incurring a large loss and a large gain compared to reference point R2. When extremeness aversion is exhibited toward only one attribute, this effect is called polarization and can be captured by allowing the loss aversion parameters to be attribute specific. The way that the model captures the extremeness aversion findings is similar to the loss aversion model that Kivetz et al. (2004) propose.
A.1.c. Enhancement and Detraction. Figure A.3 depicts enhancement and detraction effects. The fact that the comparison of F to A and B is more favorable when both A

Attribute x
and B exist versus a comparison to either one of them is called the enhancement effect. How the model captures this effect follows the same logic as that of the compromise effect. The losses for option F are smaller or are not existent or revert to gains when compared with the reference point R generated by the choice set {A B F}. However, in binary comparisons, both options have losses in one attribute and gains in another, as comparisons of F to R1 and R2 illustrate. That F fares better in {A B F} than in both binary comparisons suggests that consumers exhibit some loss aversion in each attribute. Similar to compromise effect, enhancement can be captured by the proposed model, which accounts for comparative valuations and loss aversion in such comparisons.
Detraction effect is observed when the option G fares better in binary comparisons rather than in the full set {A B G}. If the reference point in the full set is the centroid R as illustrated, option G is dominated by the reference point, bearing losses in both dimensions. Whereas in binary comparisons with A or B, it bears losses in one dimension and gains in the other, as comparisons to R1 and R2 highlight. The detraction effect occurs when losses on both dimensions cause greater disutility than in the case of a larger loss in one and a gain in the other. This effect will be more prominent if a diminishing sensitivity to gains or losses is incorporated in the comparative valuation function fk , as suggested by Tversky and Kahneman (1991).
A.2. IC Constraint for the Low Type Is Slack We need to show that
l 1 + q ql - q qr - pl + p pr - pl
> l 1 + q qh - q qr - ph - p ph - pr
Because of IR constraint binding for the low type, we know that
l 1 + q ql - q qr = pl - p pr - pl
Equivalently, we need to show that
l 1 + q qh - q qr - ph - p ph - pr < 0

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

884

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

Figure A.3 Enhancement and Detraction

Attribute y

A

R1

F

R

R2

B

Attribute x

Attribute y

A

R1 R

G

R2

B

Attribute x
and because IC constraint is binding for the high type, h 1 + q qh - q qr - ph - p ph - pr = h 1 + q ql - q qr - pl + p pr - pl
Combining with the IR constraint, we have h 1 + q qh - q qr - ph - p ph - pr = h - l 1 + q ql - q qr
and therefore, h 1 + q qh - q qr - h - l 1 + q ql - q qr = ph + p ph - pr
Then, l 1 + q qh - q qr - ph - p ph - pr
= l - h 1 + q qh - q qr + h - l 1 + q ql - q qr = l - h qh - ql + q qh - qr + q qr - ql If the consumers can be ordered in their relative valuations of quality versus money in the same way across products

and domains of gain and loss, then the optimal quality provisions are increasing in these valuations. Thus, in equilibrium, when both segments are served with distinct products, ql < qh, and therefore, by construction, ql < qr < qh. Therefore, we have,
l - h qh - ql + q qh - qr + q qr - ql < 0
A.3. IR Constraint for the High Type Is Slack Information rent is positive.

A.4. Solving for the Equilibrium Prices and Quantities The firm will charge the following prices in equilibrium:

pl =

l ql - q qrl - ql 1+ p

+ pprl

ph =

h qh + q qh - qrh

-

h - l ql - q qrl - ql 1+ p

+ pprh

Because choice set dependency posits that the reference prices are affected by other products in the product line, each price is in fact a function of the other. The equilibrium quality provisions are solutions to the following maximization problem by the firm:

max
ql qh

l pl - c ql

+ h ph - c qh

Therefore, the firm chooses optimal qualities such that

d= dqh

h

dph - dc qh dqh dqh

d= dql

l

dpl - dc ql dql dql

+

dpl l dqh

=0

+

h

dph dql

=

0

where dph = ph + dqh qh

ph qrl

qrl qh

+

ph prh

prh pl

pl qrl

qrl + qh

pl prl dph prl ph dqh

IC/comparison comparison comparison indirect/comparison

dpl = dqh

pl qrl

qrl + qh

pl prl dph prl ph dqh

comparison indirect/comparison

dpl = pl + pl prl

dql

ql

prl ph

ph + ph qrh +

ql

qrh ql

ph prh dpl prh pl dql

comparison IC

comparison indirect/comparison

dph = ph + ph qrh +

dql

ql

qrh ql

ph prh dpl prh pl dql

IC

comparison indirect/comparison

The resulting equilibrium quality provisions are

c qh

=

1+

p

1 1+ p -

p

hpl

· h 1+ q 1+ p+ l p h
h

-qh l

l 1+ p + p l
h

-

h- l

1+ p+

l ph

h

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

885

c

ql

=

1+

p

1 1+ p -

p

hp

l

· 1+ q l 1+ p + h p l - h 1+ p + p h

l

l

· h- l 1+ q + h q l

A.5. Compression and Pooling Effects

c qh

=

1+

p

1 1+ p -

p

hpl

· h 1+ q 1+ p+ l p h
h

-qh l

l 1+ p + p l
h

-

h- l

1+ p+

l ph

h

c

ql

=

1+

p

1 1+ p -

p

hp

l

· 1+ q l 1+ p + h p l - h 1+ p + p h

l

l

· h- l 1+ q + h q l

1 + p 1 + p - p h p l c qh - c ql = h 1+ q 1+ p - l 1+ q 1+ p

+ h h- l 1+ p 1+ q + l p h h 1+ q

l

h

+ p h h- l 1+ q + h q l + h q l h 1+ p
l

-qh l

l 1+ p + p l
h

-

h- l

1+ p+

l ph

h

- h p l 1+ q l
l

If only comparisons in the quality dimension matter to consumers, comparisons in the quality dimension lead to a compression of quality provision if

2

q h>
ql

l

hh
l- h h

If only comparisons in the price dimension matter, then c qh - c ql is proportional to

h 1+ p - l 1+ p + h h- l 1+ p
l

+ph

l h+ h- l - h p l l

h

l

and will be smaller than its baseline counterpart if

p l>

l

h- h l
2

ph

lh

The firm will serve both types with the same product if
q h l + h l b + w - hw - q h l + l hw
> hw - h l b + w
w= h+ h p+ l p h
b= l+ l p+ h p l
Pooling will never be profitable if only comparisons in the price dimension are made, because of the sorting condition, l 1 + q 1 + p < h 1 + q 1 + p .
References
Anderson, E. T., J. Dana. 2005. Integration models of price discrimination. Working paper, Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
Anderson, E. T., D. Simester. 2001. Research note: Price discrimination as an adverse signal: Why an offer to spread payments may hurt demand. Marketing Sci. 20(3) 315­327.
Armstrong, M. 1996. Multiproduct nonlinear pricing. Econometrica 64(1) 51­75.
Armstrong, M., J. Vickers. 2001. Competitive price discrimination. RAND J. Econom. 32(4) 579­605.
Bell, D. R., J. M. Lattin. 2000. Looking for loss aversion in scanner panel data: The confounding effect of price response heterogeneity. Marketing Sci. 19(2) 185­200.
Boatwright, P., J. Nunes. 2001. Reducing assortment: An attribute based approach. J. Marketing 65(July) 50­63.
Bodner, R., D. Prelec. 2001. The centroid model of contextdependent choice. Working paper, Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge.
Bradlow, E. T., V. R. Rao. 2000. A hierarchical Bayes model for assortment choice. J. Marketing Res. 37(2) 259­268.
Brenner, L., Y. Rottenstreich, S. Sood. 1999. Comparison, grouping, and preference. Psych. Sci. 10(3) 225­229.
Chernev, A. 2003. When more is less and less is more: The role of ideal point availability and assortment in consumer choice. J. Consumer Res. 30(2) 170­183.
Chung, J., V. R. Rao. 2003. A general choice model for bundles with multiple-category products: Application to market segmentation and optimal pricing for bundles. J. Marketing Res. 40(2) 115­130.
Desai, P. S. 2001. Quality segmentation in spatial markets: When does cannibalization affect product line design? Marketing Sci. 20(3) 265­283.
Dhar, R. 1997. Consumer preference for a no-choice option. J. Consumer Res. 24(2) 215­231.
Dhar, R., R. Glazer. 1996. Similarity in context: Cognitive representation and violation of preference and perceptual invariance in consumer choice. Organ. Behav. Human Decision Processes 67(3) 280­293.
Dolan, R. 1987. Quantity discounts: Managerial issues and research opportunities. Marketing Sci. 6(1) 1­22.
Drolet, A. L., I. Simonson, A. Tversky. 2000. Indifference curves that travel with the choice set. Marketing Lett. 11(3) 199­209.
Farquhar, P. H., V. R. Rao. 1976. A balance model for evaluating subsets of multiattributed items. Management Sci. 22(5) 528­539.
Gourville, J., D. Soman. 2005. Overchoice and assortment type: When and why variety backfires. Marketing Sci. 24(3) 382­395.
Hardie, B., E. J. Johnson, P. Fader. 1993. Modeling loss aversion and reference dependence effects on brand choice. Marketing Sci. 12(4) 378­394.
Harvard Law Record. 2001. Vino and veritas. (October 4).

Orhun: Optimal Product Line Design When Consumers Exhibit Choice Set-Dependent Preferences

886

Marketing Science 28(5), pp. 868­886, © 2009 INFORMS

Hsee, C. K., F. Leclerc. 1998. Will products look more attractive when presented separately or together? J. Consumer Res. 25(2) 175­186.
Huber, J., J. W. Payne, C. Puto. 1982. Adding asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of regularity and the similarity hypothesis. J. Consumer Res. 9(1) 90­98.
Iyengar, S., M. Lepper. 2000. When choice is demotivating: Can one desire too much of a good thing? J. Personality Soc. Psych. 79(6) 995­1006.
Kamenica, E. 2008. Contextual inference in markets: On the informational content of product lines. Amer. Econom. Rev. 98(5) 2127­2149.
Kivetz, R., O. Netzer, V. Srinivasan. 2004. Alternative models for capturing the compromise effect. J. Marketing Res. 41(3) 237­257.
Klapper, D., C. Ebling, J. Temme. 2005. Another look at lossaversion in brand choice data: Can we characterize the loss averse consumer? Internat. J. Res. Marketing 22(3) 239­255.
Koszegi, B., M. Rabin. 2006. A model of reference-dependent preferences. Quart. J. Econom. 121(4) 1133­1165.
Manchanda, P., A. Ansari, S. Gupta. 1999. Shopping basket: A model for multicategory purchase incidence decisions. Marketing Sci. 18(2) 95­114.
Mellers, B., A. Cooke. 1996. The role of task and context in preference measurement. Psych. Sci. 7(2) 76­82.
Moorthy, K. S. 1984. Market segmentation, self-selection, and product line design. Marketing Sci. 2(4) 288­307.
Moorthy, K. S. 1988. Product and price competition in a duopoly. Marketing Sci. 7(2) 141­168.
Mussa, M., S. Rosen. 1978. Monopoly and product quality. J. Econom. Theory 18 301­317.
Narasimhan, C., C. He, E. T. Anderson, L. Brenner, P. Desai, D. Kuksov, P. Messinger et al. 2005. Incorporating behavioral anomalies in strategic models. Marketing Lett. 16(3/4) 361­373.
Oren, S., S. Smith, R. Wilson. 1984. Pricing a product line. J. Bus. 57(1) 73­100.
Prelec, D., B. Wernerfelt, F. Zettelmeyer. 1997. The role of inference in context effects: Inferring what you want from what is available. J. Consumer Res. 24(1) 118­125.
Randall, K. U. T., D. Reibstein. 1998. Brand equity and vertical product line extent. Marketing Sci. 17(4) 356­379.

Reibsten, D., H. Gatignon. 1984. Optimal product line pricing: The influence of elasticities and cross-elasticities. J. Marketing Res. 21(3) 259­267.
Salant, S. 1989. When is inducing self-selection suboptimal for a monopolist? Quart. J. Econom. 104(2) 391­397.
Seetharaman, P. B., S. Chib, A. Ainslie, P. Boatwright, T. Chan, S. Gupta, N. Mehta, V. Rao, A. Strijnev. 2005. Models of multicategory choice behavior. Marketing Lett. 16(4) 239­254.
Shugan, S. M. 1984. Comments on pricing a product line. J. Bus. 57(1) S101­S107.
Shugan, S. M. 1989. Product assortment in a triopoly. Management Sci. 35(3) 304­320.
Simonson, I. 1989. Choice based on reasons: The case of attraction and compromise effects. J. Consumer Res. 16(2) 158­174.
Simonson, I., A. Tversky. 1992. Choice in context: Tradeoff contrast and extremeness aversion. J. Marketing Res. 29(3) 281­295.
Song, I., P. Chintagunta. 2006. Measuring cross-category price effects with aggregate store data. Management Sci. 52(10) 1594­1609.
Stock, A., S. Balachander. 2005. Hot product: A signalling explanation of marketers' scarcity strategy. Management Sci. 51(8) 1181­1192.
Stole, L. 1995. Nonlinear pricing and oligopoly. J. Econom. Management Strategy 4(4) 529­562.
Tversky, A., D. Kahneman. 1991. Loss aversion in riskless choice: A reference-dependent model. Quart. J. Econom. 106(4) 1039­1061.
Tversky, A., E. Shafir. 1992. Choice under conflict: The dynamics of deferred decision. Psych. Sci. 3(6) 358­361.
Tversky, A., I. Simonson. 1993. Context dependent preferences. Management Sci. 39(10) 1179­1189.
Villas-Boas, J. M. 1999. Dynamic competition with customer recognition. RAND J. Econom. 30(4) 604­631.
Villas-Boas, J. M., U. Schmidt-Mohr. 1999. Oligopoly with asymmetric information: Differentiation in credit markets. RAND J. Econom. 30(3) 375­396.
Wall Street Journal. 2002. Tastings. (April 19).
Wernerfelt, B. 1995. A rational reconstruction of the compromise effect: Using market data to infer utilities. J. Consumer Res. 21(4) 627­633.

