Vol. 28, No. 4, JulyГAugust 2009, pp. 792Г801 issn 0732-2399 eissn 1526-548X 09 2804 0792

informs «
doi 10.1287/mksc.1080.0445 Е 2009 INFORMS

Research Note
Impact of Customer Knowledge Heterogeneity on Bundling Strategy
Amiya Basu, Padmal Vitharana
Whitman School of Management, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York 13244 {abasu@syr.edu, padmal@syr.edu}
We consider a marketer of components who can select one of three alternative pricing strategies: (1) a pure component strategy (i.e., the customer can only buy the components individually), (2) a pure bundling strategy (i.e., the components must be purchased together), or (3) a mixed bundling strategy (i.e., the customer may buy a component individually, or buy the bundle). We consider a market where customer knowledge of components varies and propose that a high-knowledge customer can determine with greater certainty whether a given component is useful to her. Consequently, more knowledgeable customers have higher variability in their reservation price of a component. Using an analytical model, we identify the conditions under which each of the three pricing strategies maximizes profit and show that three factors determine the optimal strategy: marginal costs of components, distribution of knowledge over the customer population, and relative sizes of customer segments where each segment is interested in the same subset of components. Managerial implications and directions for future research are discussed.
Key words: components; bundling; pricing History: Received: June 5, 2007; accepted: March 19, 2008; processed by Charles Ingene. Published online in
Articles in Advance January 12, 2009.

1. Introduction
Bundling is the practice of offering two or more products as a package (Ghosh and Balachander 2007). Bundling strategy has interested researchers for a long time, and a rich literature stream with ever-widening scope has followed the seminal works of Adams and Yellen (1976) and Schmalensee (1984).
Bundling may benefit both the customer and the marketer. The customer gains from reduced search and transaction costs (Harris and Blair 2006, Yadav and Monroe 1993), and the marketer can generate greater profits through price discrimination and demand expansion (Hitt and Chen 2005, Venkatesh and Mahajan 1993, Eppen et al. 1991, Schmalensee 1984, Adams and Yellen 1976). Bundling also enables the marketer to reduce risk in introducing new products, lessen consumer uncertainty about product quality, exploit product complementarity, and achieve economies of scope (Hitt and Chen 2005, Venkatesh and Kamakura 2003, Simonin and Ruth 1995, Venkatesh and Mahajan 1993, Eppen et al. 1991). Stremersch and Tellis (2002) provide a comprehensive review of the bundling literature. Some of the key contributions to research on bundling include the examination of information products (Bakos and Brynjolfsson 1999, 2000a, b; Geng et al. 2005; Venkatesh and Chatterjee 2006), services (see Rust and Chung 2006 for a review),

and intertemporal bundling (Radas and Shugan 1998, Sankaranarayanan 2007).
Several researchers examine when a marketer should adopt a pure component (sell each component individually), pure bundling (sell only the bundle), or mixed bundling (the customer may buy any individual component or the bundle) strategy. For example, using an empirical study involving a series of music/dance performances, Venkatesh and Mahajan (1993) demonstrate that mixed bundling can be more profitable than pure component or pure bundling strategies. Hanson and Martin (1990) formulate optimal bundle price using a mixed integer linear program. Venkatesh and Kamakura (2003) examine the impact of demand interdependencies among components on bundling strategy.
We consider a marketer selling components who can select a pure component, pure bundling, or a mixed bundling strategy. Our research relates closely to Schmalensee (1984) and Bakos and Brynjolfsson (1999). Similar to their work, we consider the distribution of reservation prices of components over the customer population, and posit that a new variable, customer knowledge of components (knowledge), affects this distribution. Customer knowledge plays an important role in purchase behavior (Alba and Hutchinson 1987, Sujan 1985). We argue that prior to

792

Basu and Vitharana: Impact of Customer Knowledge Heterogeneity on Bundling Strategy

Marketing Science 28(4), pp. 792Г801, Е 2009 INFORMS

793

purchase, high-knowledge customers can assess the value of a component more accurately than a lowknowledge customer. Hence, if a high-knowledge customer finds a component (not) useful, she would have a (lower) higher reservation price for the component than low-knowledge customers. Therefore, the gap between the reservation prices for "useful" and "not useful" components would increase with customer knowledge, resulting in greater variation of reservation price. An empirical study we conducted supports this position. (Details and findings of the study are available on request.)
It is easy to find both consumer and business product categories where such variation in reservation price may occur:
и A software developer for business applications is deciding which specific software components she needs to buy. She must determine how the available components match her application requirements.
и A professor is deciding which modules of the statistical software SAS she should lease.
и A customer is considering purchase of the components of a home entertainment system such as a TV, VCR, DVD player, stereo receiver, and speakers.
и An automobile owner is choosing between purchasing a suite of services, or specific items such as oil change and tire rotation. In all these cases, a more knowledgeable customer can better assess the value of a component to herself.
The assumption that the gap between high and low valuations of a component depends on knowledge allows us to consider scenarios very different from those examined by prior researchers. For instance, the classic work of Schmalensee (1984) assumes that the reservation prices of the bundle components follow a multivariate normal distribution, where the contour of equal probability is an ellipsoid, and the distribution is denser near the centroid of the ellipsoid. Our framework is more flexible. For instance, a prevalence of high-knowledge customers gives us a dumb-bell shaped equal probability contour where customers have either high or low valuations.
In their analysis of bundle pricing, Bakos and Brynjolfsson (1999; 2000a, b) do not consider differences in the variance of the reservation price between multiple consumer groups. Their rationale is based on the "law of large numbers," which assures that the deadweight loss per good and the consumer surplus per good in the bundle converge to zero, hence maximizing the marketer's profit. In contrast, by considering customer knowledge, we can find the profit maximizing pricing strategy without invoking the law of large numbers.
We show that three factors determine the nature of the optimal pricing plan: marginal costs of the components, the distribution of knowledge over the customer population, and the relative sizes of customer

segments where each segment is interested in the same subset of components. (For instance, for two components, the segments are customers interested in both components, only the first component, only the second component, and neither component.) We find that
1. If marginal costs are very low, profit is maximized by a pure bundling plan with a medium or a low price. As marginal costs become somewhat higher, the pure bundling plan continues to be optimal as long as customer knowledge is generally low.
2. If marginal costs are high and high-knowledge customers are present in abundance, two cases may arise. If customers tend to be interested in a majority of the components at once, a pure component plan that offers each component at a high price is optimal. In contrast, if customers tend to be interested in a minority of the components and not interested in the rest, a mixed bundling plan that offers the bundle at a medium or low price, but offers the components at even higher prices than the pure component plan, is optimal.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we develop a framework to show how valuations of a component may differ among customers of different knowledge categories, thus giving the marketer an opportunity to segment the market based on customer knowledge. We then develop an analytical model of customer choice of components and use it to show that all three strategies (pure component, pure bundling, mixed bundling) may be appropriate in different contexts. The findings are illustrated with a numerical example. In Д4, we summarize our findings, discuss the managerial implications of our research, and outline future research directions. Proofs are provided in the Technical Appendices available at http:// mktsci.pub.informs.org.
2. Conceptual Framework and Model Development
We consider a monopolist marketer who sells two components of similar value and wants to maximize expected profit. (In the concluding section, we discuss the implications of our findings for competitive strategy.)
2.1. Customer Choice We assume that a customer would purchase at most one unit of each component and that, given alternative product offerings, she would select the offer that gives her the highest surplus, defined as reservation price minus price. The no-purchase option is always available to her, which offers zero surplus. Thus, an offering by the marketer is selected only if its surplus is at least zero. Given two options with equal surplus, we assume that the customer can be given a slight inducement to select the offering that is more profitable to the marketer.

Basu and Vitharana: Impact of Customer Knowledge Heterogeneity on Bundling Strategy

794

Marketing Science 28(4), pp. 792Г801, Е 2009 INFORMS

We make the following assumptions about the reser-

vation prices of customers:

1. We assume that the components are of similar

value to customers. For a given customer, a compo-

nent may or may not be useful. The true value of the

component to a customer is 1 + D if the component

is useful, and 1 - D if the component is not useful,

where 0 < D  1. We assume that D is common across

customers. If D = 1, the component has no value to

the customer if it is not useful; otherwise, it has some

residual value. The average of the high and low true

values, which we call "medium valuation," is chosen

to be unity.

Customers vary in their ability to determine wheth-

er a component is truly useful before purchase. If the

customer feels a component is useful, she assigns a

pabroilbitaybi12lit1y-12

1 + that it is really useful, and a probthat it is really not useful, where 

0 1 is an individual specific variable. If the customer

does not feel the component is useful, she assigns a

pabroilbitaybi12lit1y+12

1 - that it is really useful, and a that it is really not useful.

prob-

A larger indicates greater ability to determine

whether the component is useful prior to purchase.

For instance, if = 1 and the customer feels a com-

ponent is useful, she assigns a 100% probability the

component is useful, and a 0% probability the compo-

nent is not useful. In contrast, if = 0, the customer

assigns only a 50% probability that the component is

useful.

We assume that the customer is risk neutral; that is,

the reservation price of a component is its expected

value before purchase. Thus, the reservation price of

a component is 1 + D if, prior to purchase, the cus-

tomer thinks the component is useful, and 1 - D if

she does not. Denoting D by a, a customer's reser-

vation price of a component is 1 + a if she thinks

the component is useful, and 1 - a if she thinks it

is not useful. Because a = D increases with a cus-

tomer's ability to determine whether a component is

useful, a is a proxy for the customer's knowledge of

components.

We assume that there are at least some customers

with a > 0, and define K = max a. The parameter K

captures how far the reservation price of a component

can deviate from the "medium reservation price" of

unity. We assume that K is same for both components.

Thus, for either component, a  0 K where K > 0.

2. Following common practice (e.g., Adams and

Yellen 1976, Schmalensee 1984), we assume that the

reservation price of the bundle is equal to the sum of

the reservation prices of the two components.1

1 A notable exception is Venkatesh and Kamakura (2003) who model the reservation price of a bundle in terms of the demand interdependency among the components.

2.2. Customer Segments and Demand We assume a market of unit size with demands equal to probabilities. The reservation price of a given component to a customer of type a is either 1 + a (high valuation) or 1 - a (low valuation). Thus, there are four customer segments, high-high (HH), high-low (HL), low-high (LH), and low-low (LL), with reservation prices as shown below.

Reservation price of Segment Component 1 Component 2 Bundle

HH

1+a

1+a

2 1 + a)

HL

1+a

1-a

2

LH

1-a

1+a

2

LL

1-a

1-a

2 1-a

We denote the probabilities of the four segments by QHH, QHL, QLH, and QLL, respectively, and make the following assumptions about the four customer segments:
1. The cumulative distribution function of a, denoted by F a , is the same for all four segments.
2. The high-low and low-high segments are equal in size, that is, QHL = QLH. This is equivalent to assuming that both components have the same marginal probability, QHH + QLH , of being considered useful.
2.3. Marketer's Problem We assume that each component has the same constant marginal cost c, and that the marginal cost of the bundle is 2c. We denote the prices of component 1 and component 2 by P1 and P2, respectively, and the price of the bundle by PB. Note that we can always create a mixed bundling plan that generates the same expected profit as any pure component or pure bundling plan by combining the latter with an alternative so unattractive that it is never chosen. Thus, it is important to determine when a mixed bundling plan can generate more profit than any pure component or pure bundling plan.
In Technical Appendix TA1 (available at http:// mktsci.pubs.informs.org), we examine the special case in which all customers have the same value of a, and show that
1. The mixed bundling plan never generates greater profit than all pure component and pure bundling plans.
2. The optimal plan is a pure component plan that sells each component at 1 + a if a is high, a pure bundling plan with a bundle price of 2 if a is medium, and a pure bundling plan with a bundle price of 2 1 - a if a is low.2 Thus, if a is high, some customers

2 Specifically, the pure component plan with component price 1+a is optimal if

a  max 1 - c QLH QHH + QLH

1 - c 1 - QHH + QLH 1 + QHH + QLH

Basu and Vitharana: Impact of Customer Knowledge Heterogeneity on Bundling Strategy

Marketing Science 28(4), pp. 792Г801, Е 2009 INFORMS

795

are ready to pay high prices, and it is optimal to sell individual components to only high value customers. Otherwise, it is optimal to expand the market by offering a medium or low priced bundle.
It is therefore meaningful to examine mixed bundling plans only if a varies across customers. Also, the results for the special case imply that if knowledge is concentrated in a narrow zone, the pure component plan is optimal when knowledge is high and the pure bundling plan is optimal when knowledge is low. Thus, to provide a neutral background for the comparison of strategies, we assume that a is uniformly distributed over 0 K ; that is,

F

a

=

a K

if 0  a  K

and 0 otherwise

(1)

Under this assumption, the demand function closely corresponds to the commonly used linear demand function. The results are presented in the next section.

3. Profit Maximizing Strategies for Uniform Distribution of Knowledge
In this section, we discuss profit maximizing strategies when customer knowledge a follows the uniform distribution given by Equation (1). The three strategies under consideration (pure component, pure bundling, mixed bundling) include many possible combinations of prices. The following proposition allows us to focus on a relatively small set of plans.
Proposition 1. If a is uniformly distributed over 0 K , K > 0, then one of the following three classes of pricing plans always includes the profit maximizing plan:
C1. Symmetric High Pure Component Plan: P1 = P2 = 1 + x, where x  0.
B1. Medium-Low Pure Bundling Plan: PB = 2 1 - z , where z  0.
M1. Symmetric High Component/Medium-Low Bundling Mixed Bundling Plan: PB = 2 1-z , P1 = P2 = 1+x, where z  0, x  -z.
The proof of Proposition 1 is provided in Technical Appendix TA available at http://mktsci.pubs.informs. org. There, we show that for any pure component plan not in C1, or a pure bundling plan not in B1, there is a plan in either C1 or B1 that generates equal

the pure bundling plan with bundle price 2 is optimal if

1 - c QLL  a 

1 - c QLH QHH + QLH

and the pure bundling plan with bundle price 2 1 - a is optimal if

a  min 1 - c QLL

1 - c 1 - QHH + QLH 1 + QHH + QLH

or greater expected profit.3 We also show that for any mixed bundling plan not in M1, there is always a plan in C1, B1, or M1 that generates equal or greater expected profit. Thus, taken together, C1, B1, and M1 always include the profit maximizing plan. (A plan not included in these three classes may also generate the maximum expected profit.)
From Proposition 1, it is sufficient to consider bundling plans with bundle prices not exceeding 2. If c  1, a bundle price of 2 or less never generates a positive contribution, and hence the pure component plan is optimal. We henceforth assume that c < 1. The difference 1 - c measures the contribution margin if a component unit is sold at the medium reservation price and plays an important role in subsequent discussions.
3.1. Results on Classes of Plans Examined We first describe these three classes of plans and identify the best (profit maximizing) plan within each class. Then, we compare the results and identify the profit maximizing plan. The derivations are provided in Technical Appendix TA2 available at http://mktsci. pubs.informs.org.
Class C1. For this plan, demands in the four segments and the expected profit ( C1) are summarized below.

Segment HH

Buy both components if a  x,

buy nothing if a < x

Segment HL

Buy component 1 if a  x,

buy nothing if a < x

Segment LH

Buy component 2 if a  x,

buy nothing if a < x

Segment LL

Buy nothing

C1 = 2 1 + x - c QHH + QLH 1 - F x

The profit maximizing premium (xC1), and the max-

imum expected profit (

 C1

)

are

presented

in

Table

1.

Here, x is the premium charged per component over

the medium valuation of unity. At x = 0, all HH cus-

tomers buy both components, and all HL and LH cus-

tomers buy one component each, at a margin of 1 - c

per component. Every 1% increase in margin from this

level reduces demand by 1 - c /K%. Thus, xC1 = 0 if K  1 - c (i.e., 1 - c /K  1), and xC1 > 0 if K > 1 - c (i.e., 1 - c /K < 1). Intuitively, if K is small, an increase

in premium from zero reduces demand sharply, and

3 This result holds for any distribution of a. If a follows the uniform distribution given by Equation (1), we have the stronger result that a pure component plan not in C1 or a pure bundling plan not in B1 can match the expected profit of the best plan in C1 and B1 combined only if one of the following occurs: (1) QLH = 0, and (2) the profit maximizing price of an individual component is the clearance price 1 - K .

Basu and Vitharana: Impact of Customer Knowledge Heterogeneity on Bundling Strategy

796

Marketing Science 28(4), pp. 792Г801, Е 2009 INFORMS

Table 1 Profit Maximizing Prices and Expected Profits for Plans

Pure component plans in Class C1

Case 1(a) K  1 - c

Premium/component (xC1) 0

1(b) K > 1 - c

1 2

K-

1-c

Pure bundling plans in Class B1

Case

Discount/component (zB1)

2(a)

QLL  1 - c K

 1 - QLL

2(b)

1 - QLL

< QLL  1 - c K

< 1 + QLL

2(c)

QLL  1 - c K

> 1 + QLL

0

1 - c - K  1 - QLL

2

2QLL

K

Mixed bundling plans in Class M1

Case 3(a) K  1 - c

Premium/component for individually offered component (xM 1)
K - 2zB1

Discount/component for bundle(zM 1)
zB1

3(b) K > 1 - c

1 2

K+

1-c

- 2zB1

zB1

Expected profit (

 C1

)

2 1 - c QHH + QLH

K

1-c 2

2 1+ K

QHH + QLH

Expected profit (

 B1

)

2 1 - c QHH + 2QLH

K  QLL 2

1 - c + 1 - QLL 2

K

QLL

2 1-K -c

Expected profit (

 M1

)

 B1

 B1

+

K  QLH 2

1-

1-c K

2

profit is maximized at zero premium. However, if K is large, the presence of high value customers allows the marketer to charge a premium above zero, and profit increases as K increases. Also, as HH customers buy both components while HL and LH customers buy one component, a plan in Class C1 performs better if QHH is larger compared to QLH.
Class B1. For this plan, z is a discount per component from the medium valuation. Demands in the four segments and the expected profit ( B1) are summarized below.

Segments HH, HL, LH All customers buy bundle

Segment LL

Buy bundle if a  z, buy

nothing otherwise

B1 = 2 1 - z - c QHH + 2QLH + QLL  F z

The profit maximizing discount per component (zB1) and the maximum expected profit ( B1) are presented in Table 1. Compared to the pure component plan C1,
the pure bundling plan B1 expands demand by always
selling the bundle to all HH, HL, and LH customers.
The profit maximizing discount level is determined by
the trade-off between attracting customers from the
LL segment (size = QLL) and losing margin from the captive HH, HL, and LH segments (combined size =
1 - QLL). If the discount z increases from zero, every

1% reduction in margin from 1 - c corresponds to gaining 1 - c /K % of the LL segment. The comparison of 1 - QLL and 1 - c /K QLL determines whether a discount is offered.
If the LL segment is small, the profit maximizing strategy is to ignore the LL segment and set the bundle price at 2 (zero discount). However, if the LL segment is large, it is profitable to set a bundle price lower than 2 to attract some of the low value customers. This option is particularly meaningful if K is small, and a small discount is enough to induce a significant part of the LL segment to buy the bundle.
Class M1. For this plan, demands in the four segments and the expected profit ( M1) are summarized below.
Segment HH All customers buy bundle Segment HL Buy component 1 if a > x + 2z,
buy bundle otherwise Segment LH Buy component 2 if a > x + 2z,
buy bundle otherwise Segment LL Buy bundle if a  z, buy nothing
if a > z M1 = 2 1 - z - c QHH + 2QLHF x + 2z + QLLF z
+ 2 1 + x - c QLH 1 - F x + 2z

Basu and Vitharana: Impact of Customer Knowledge Heterogeneity on Bundling Strategy

Marketing Science 28(4), pp. 792Г801, Е 2009 INFORMS

797

Table 2 Profit Maximizing Plan

Case

1. K  1 - c

2. K > 1 - c

(a)

QLL 1 - c K

 1 - QLL

(Area 1 in Figure 1)

(b) 1 - c 2  1 - QLL < 1 - c

K

QLL

K

(Area 2 in Figure 1)

(c) 1 - QLL < 1 - c 2

QLL

K

(Area 3 in Figure 1)

Condition All possible segment sizes

Profit maximizing plan Pure bundling

2QLH 1 - QLL
1- < 1+
1- =
1+
1- > 1+

1 - c /K 2 1 - c /K 2 1 - c /K 2 1 - c /K 2 1 - c /K 2 1 - c /K 2

2QLH 1 - QLL
< QLL/ 1 - QLL
= QLL/ 1 - QLL
> QLL/ 1 - QLL

- 1 1 - QLL /QLL - 1 + 1 - c /K 2
- 1 1 - QLL /QLL - 1 + 1 - c /K 2
- 1 1 - QLL /QLL - 1 + 1 - c /K 2

1 - c /K 2 1 - c /K 2 1 - c /K 2

Pure component Pure component and mixed bundling (tie) Mixed bundling
Pure component Pure component and mixed bundling (tie) Mixed bundling Mixed bundling

The profit maximizing levels of x and z, denoted

by xM 1 and zM1, respectively, and the maximum

expected profit (

 M1

)

are

provided

in

Table

1.

For any z  0, x can be set so large that the customer

never purchases an individual component. Then, the

mixed bundling plan reduces to a pure bundling plan

in Class B1. Hence, the best mixed bundling plan

in M1 never generates less profit than the best pure

bundling plan in B1.

To determine whether a plan in M1 can generate

more profit than the best plan in B1, consider a mixed

bundling plan in class M1 and a pure bundling plan

in Class B1 with the same discount, z, per component.

The two plans generate the same response except for

customers in the HL and LH segments with a > x + 2z

who purchase one component under M1 and the bun-

dle under B1. Also, the margin from selling one com-

ponent at price 1+x exceeds the margin from selling

the bundle at price 2 1 - z if and only if x + 2z >

1 - c. Thus, the M1 plan can be more profitable than

the B1 plan only if there are HL and LH customers

with a > 1 - c.

If K  1 - c , there are no customers with a > 1 - c,

and

 M1

cannot

exceed

 B1

.

Then,

the

best

plan

in

M1

offers the same discount as the best plan in B1 and

sets individual component prices so high that an indi-

vidual component is never selected.

If K > 1-c , there are customers with a > 1-c, and

 M1

>

 B1

as

long

as

QLH

> 0.

The

bundle

is

offered

at the same discount as the best plan in B1 (zM1 = zB1), but individual components are priced higher than in a pure component plan (xM 1 > xC 1). This happens because under the mixed bundling plan, individual components are purchased only by fringe customers ready to pay a high price for a component to avoid buying the other component.
3.2. Profit Maximizing Plan Table 2 presents the profit maximizing plan. There are two main cases.
Case 1. K  1 - c : Here, the pure bundling plan is optimal regardless of segment sizes; mixed bundling offers no advantage over a pure bundling plan. Also, the best plan in Class C1 sets P1 = P2 = 1, and sells both components to customers in HH and one component to customers in HL and LH. Because a pure bundling plan with price 2 sells both components to all customers in HH, HL, and LH, it follows that a plan in B1 is at least as profitable as the best plan in C1 and strictly more profitable if QLH > 0.
Two reasons favor the pure bundling plan here. First, marginal cost is low, and the marketer can obtain a reasonable margin even when he sets a medium or low price. Second, the gap between high and low valuations is not large; hence, it is not profitable to focus only on high value customers. Instead, it is optimal to expand demand by adopting a medium or low bundling strategy. If the LL segment is large, the bundle is offered at a price lower than the medium

Basu and Vitharana: Impact of Customer Knowledge Heterogeneity on Bundling Strategy

798

Marketing Science 28(4), pp. 792Г801, Е 2009 INFORMS

valuation. Otherwise, the bundle is priced at the medium valuation.
Case 2. K > 1 - c : Here, the profit maximizing plan is either a pure component or a mixed bundling plan, and the optimal plan is determined by three ratios:
(1) 2QLH/ 1 - QLL , which is the size of the market interested in only one component as a fraction of the market interested in one or both components.
(2) 1 - QLL /QLL, which is the size of the market interested in one or both components as a multiple of the size of the market interested in neither component.
(3) 1 - c /K, which plays two roles. First, an increase in this ratio makes it more attractive to expand demand using a medium or a low priced bundle than serve only high value customers with a premium price. Second, since K > 1 - c , only a fraction 1 - c /K of LL customers have reservation prices exceeding marginal cost. Thus, a larger 1 - c /K increases the profit potential of the LL segment.
Figure 1 illustrates how the optimal plan depends on these three ratios.
The pure component plan never serves LL customers. As shown in Figure 1, we have three distinct areas depending on the size of the LL segment.
Area 1. Here, the LL segment is not significantly larger than the remaining segments combined, and the mixed bundling plan does not serve the LL segment (zM1 = 0). The pure component plan sells both components to HH customers and benefits from a larger HH segment. In contrast, the mixed bundling plan generates the profit of the pure bundling plan plus an increment proportional to QLH. Thus, if QHH is larger compared to QLH, the pure component plan performs better relative to the mixed bundling plan.
The pure component plan is optimal as long as 2QLH/ 1 - QLL is lower than a ceiling that depends

Figure 1
2QLH 1Г QLL

Profit Maximizing Plan When K > 1 - c

1

Area 3



Area 2   

Area 1  

(1 Г{1Гc})2  K

1 + (1Гc)2

K




 0
0

 



 

ии ии

Mixed bundling и и и optimal иии

ии ии



 и и Pure component optimal и и



ии

иии и

ии

(1KГc )2

(1KГ c )


ии ии ии
ии
ии 1Г QLL QLL

only on 1 - c /K. An increase in 1 - c /K makes the pure bundling plan more attractive, and hence reduces the profitability of the pure component plan relative to the mixed bundling plan. For instance, if 1 - c /K = 0 1, the pure component plan is optimal if 2QLH/ 1 - QLL  0 802; that is, QHH is at least 0.4938 times QLH. However, if 1 - c /K = 0 5, QHH must be at least eight times as large as QLH for the pure component plan to be optimal.
Area 2. The LL segment is now larger, and the mixed bundling plan offers a discount to attract LL customers (zM1 > 0). If either QLL or 1-c /K increases, the LL segment becomes more profitable to serve, and the pure component plan, which does not serve the LL segment, becomes less profitable relative to the mixed bundling plan. Thus, the ceiling of 2QLH/ 1 - QLL for the pure component plan to be optimal is lower than in Area 1, and decreases if either 1 - c /K or QLL increases. As 1 - QLL /QLL approaches 1 - c /K 2, the ceiling becomes zero.
Area 3. The LL segment is now very large, and the mixed bundling plan is always more profitable than the pure component plan.

3.3. Numerical Example

We now construct a numerical example to show how

often pure component and mixed bundling plans are

optimal when K > 1 - c . Let p denote the marginal

probability that either component is considered use-

ful, and r the correlation between the two binary

variables u1 and u2 where ui = 1 if component i is considered useful, and ui = 0 if not. r is positive when customers tend to either find both components

useful, or both components not useful. r is negative

when customers tend to be interested in one com-

ponent but not the other. r can take any value from

- min p/ 1 - p 1 - p /p to 1.

In Technical Appendix TA3 (available at http://

mktsci.pubs.informs.org), we show that for any value

of 1 - c /K, we can always make

 C1

<

 M1

by

mak-

ing p very small, and

 C1

>

 M1

by

making

p

very

large. For intermediate values of p, there is a level of r

where the pure component strategy and the mixed

bundling strategy are equally profitable. If r exceeds

this level, the pure component strategy is more prof-

itable, and if r is below this level, the mixed bundling

strategy is more profitable.

Figure 2 shows, for nine levels of 1 - c /K ranging

from low to high (0.1 to 0.9, in steps of 0.1), the graph

of r where

 C1

=

 M1

against

p.

The

area

bounded

by p = 0, p = 1, r = - min p/ 1 - p 1 - p /p and

r = 1 represents all valid combinations of p and r. For

each value of 1 - c /K, the graph divides this area

into two zones: the pure component plan is optimal

to the right of the graph, and the mixed bundling

Basu and Vitharana: Impact of Customer Knowledge Heterogeneity on Bundling Strategy

Marketing Science 28(4), pp. 792Г801, Е 2009 INFORMS

799

r

Figure 2 1.5

p - r Plots for

 C1

=

 M1

1.0 0.5
0 0

r max = 1

0.8 0.9 0.7 0.5 0.6

0.2 0.1

0.3 0.4

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

Г0.5

r min Г1.0

Г1.5 0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

p

Notes. r max = 1; r min = Г min p/ 1 - p 1 - p /p . From bottom left to top right, the plots are for 1 - c /K = 0 1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, and 0.9, respectively.

plan is optimal to the left of the graph. Note that as 1 - c /K increases, the zone where the pure component plan is optimal shrinks, and vanishes as 1-c /K approaches 1.

4. Conclusion
4.1. Summary of Findings We examine the pricing problem of a profit maximizing monopolist marketer who sells two components. We develop a model of customer response based on the idea that customers vary in their knowledge of components, and higher knowledge corresponds to a greater difference between a high valuation and a low valuation of a component by the customer. We show that the choice of strategy depends on (1) marginal costs of components, (2) distribution of knowledge among customers, and (3) the relative sizes of customer segments interested in the same subset of components. We find
1. If the marginal cost of a component is low, and the difference between a high valuation and a low valuation is not large, then a pure bundling strategy with a medium or low bundle price is optimal. The objective of this strategy is to induce customers who value only one component to buy both components as a bundle. That strategy is appropriate here because (a) the low marginal cost allows sufficient margin even when a discounted bundle is offered, and (b) an individual component cannot be sold at a premium price because reservation prices are never high.
Bakos and Brynjolfsson (1999, 2000b) show the optimality of a pure bundling strategy when the number of components is large. Our results show when this strategy is optimal if the number of components is small.

2. If the marginal cost is high or the gap between high and low valuations can be large, then either a pure component strategy or a mixed bundling strategy is appropriate. Both these strategies aim to sell individual components at a higher price to high value customers. However, the two strategies have important differences.
The mixed bundling plan includes the pure bundling plan in a menu and generates at least as much profit as the pure bundling plan. It also generates extra profit by selling individual components at a premium price to high value customers in the HL and LH segments. (High value customers in the HH segment select the discounted bundle.) Hence, this strategy is suitable when the HL and LH segments are large, which happens when the customers tend to be interested in only one of the two components.
In contrast, the pure component plan sells both components to high value customers interested in both components, and only one component to high value customers interested in only one component. Thus, a larger HH segment favors the pure component plan. As long as the LL segment is not very large, either the pure component or the mixed bundling strategy may be optimal depending on the relative sizes of two customer segments: customers, who value both components, and customers who value only one component. If the former segment is large, then the pure component strategy is optimal; otherwise, the mixed bundling strategy is more profitable. Also, the mixed bundling strategy sells individual components to higher value customers than the pure component strategy and sets higher prices for them.
If the LL segment is very large, the mixed bundling plan, which serves the LL segment, is always more profitable than the pure component plan.
4.2. Managerial Implications Our findings show that for a component marketer, the bundling strategy depends on marginal costs as well as knowledge dispersion, and thus vary from one product category to another. The following cases illustrate such variation.
1. For a marketer of software components, the following scenarios may emerge.
If the marketer is selling proprietary software components, marginal costs will be low because digital products can be copied and distributed at very low cost. Then, a pure bundling strategy is clearly appropriate.
However, if the marketer is a third party vendor who distributes some other company's software, it likely has to pay royalties to the owner of the software. In such cases, marginal cost is likely to be significant. There can now be two distinct situations.

Basu and Vitharana: Impact of Customer Knowledge Heterogeneity on Bundling Strategy

800

Marketing Science 28(4), pp. 792Г801, Е 2009 INFORMS

(a) If the software component has many different applications, then it has some value even for customers who do not use it often. In that case, the range of reservation prices should be low, and a pure bundling strategy would still be appropriate.4
(b) In contrast, if a software component only has a very specialized application, there will be greater variation in its reservation price. This will favor a pure component strategy or a mixed bundling strategy.
2. Software (e.g., SAS) and information products (e.g., subscription to databases). As these are digital products with low marginal costs, the managerial implications are the same as those for software components, and favor a pure bundling strategy unless large royalties are involved.
3. High technology products such as stereo components. If a customer is knowledgeable about the product category, she is likely to be knowledgeable about each component, and the proposed model would apply. In this case, marginal costs should be high in general, making a pure component or mixed bundling strategy more appropriate than a pure bundling strategy.
4. Service products, such as automotive service. These products are usually labor intensive with high marginal costs. The appropriate strategy depends on the complexity of the product.
If the service involved is simple (such as oil and filter change or tire rotation), virtually all customers can evaluate a service component easily and are thus high-knowledge customers. Because customer knowledge is concentrated, mixed bundling is not necessary. Two cases may arise. If the need for service components arise independently (such as tire repair or windshield wiper replacement), a pure component strategy is appropriate. If, on the other hand, the need for service components arises simultaneously (for example, oil and filter may degrade together and need replacement at the same time), a bundle may be offered for convenience.
If the service is complex (such as fuel injector or electric system repair), high-knowledge customers should exhibit greater variation in valuations compared to low-knowledge customers. As marginal costs are high, the pure component or mixed bundling strategies are appropriate.
Table 3 presents these managerial implications in a 2 О 2 knowledge dispersion/marginal cost matrix. Note that these results lend themselves easily to empirical testing. We hope future research will examine these issues systematically.
4 A software component with many applications may itself be a bundle of functionalities. Thus, the marketer may have to make bundling decisions in multiple stages. We thank an anonymous reviewer for the intuition.

Table 3

Summary of Managerial Implications for Different Product Categories

Marginal cost

Knowledge dispersion

Low

High

Low

Information goods, basic

software, digital

entertainment products

Examples: Electronic

journals, digital music

Appropriate strategy: Pure bundling unless royalties are high

Software components for component-based software design, advanced statistical software
Examples: SAS modules Appropriate strategy: Pure bundling unless royalties are high

High

Basic automotive service

Examples: Tire rotation, oil

change

Complex automotive service, expensive electronic goods
Examples: Fuel injection repair, high-end stereo

Appropriate strategy: Pure bundling for convenience if service components are needed simultaneously, otherwise pure component

Appropriate strategy: Pure component, or mixed bundling

4.2.1. Implications for Competitive Strategy. While we examine a monopolist marketer, the proposed framework can be applied to examine competitive strategy. Consider a duopoly of two marketers, 1 and 2, both offering two components at similar marginal costs. Suppose at present both use a mediumlow pure bundling strategy. If marketer 2 unilaterally shifts to a high price pure component strategy, it would lose all HH customers who would buy the bundle offered by the rival, and its market would be limited to HL and LH customers who are ready to pay a high price for one component. Marketer 2 would do better to shift to mixed bundling to retain its HH customers. Thus, the proposed framework implies that pure or mixed bundling strategies are likely to be the competitive equilibria unless marginal costs are high. Clearly, a thorough examination of competitive equilibrium should incorporate possible cost asymmetries and demand interdependencies. We leave this to future research.
4.3. Limitations and Directions for Future Research
We analyzed a symmetric case involving two components with the same medium valuation, same gap between high and low valuations, same marginal cost, and the same marginal probability of being considered useful. Similarly, we assumed that the customers are equally knowledgeable about both components. It will be interesting to study how results change when the number of components increases. It will also be interesting to introduce asymmetry in one or more dimensions. For instance, if a customer has high-knowledge

Basu and Vitharana: Impact of Customer Knowledge Heterogeneity on Bundling Strategy

Marketing Science 28(4), pp. 792Г801, Е 2009 INFORMS

801

of component 1 but low knowledge of component 2, then the gap between high and low valuations will be different for the two components. Then, there will be fewer customers willing to pay high prices for an individual component, making the pure component and mixed bundling strategies less attractive. Also, the reservation price of the bundle will now vary over a range, thus affecting the optimal bundle price. It will be interesting to examine these issues in future research.
Acknowledgments The authors thank former Marketing Science Editor-inChief Steven M. Shugan and the review team for constructive suggestions and guidance through the review process. The authors also thank Atasi Basu, Michel Benaroch, Patrick Cihon, Prabuddha De, Scott Webster, and participants in research seminars at Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York, and McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, for comments and feedback. This research was funded by grants from the Robert H. Brethen Operations Management Institute and the Earl V. Snyder Innovation Management Center at the Whitman School of Management, Syracuse University.
References
Adams, W. J., J. L. Yellen. 1976. Commodity bundling and the burden of monopoly. Quart.J. Econom. 90(3) 475Г498.
Alba, J. W., J. W. Hutchinson. 1987. Dimensions of consumer expertise. J. Consumer Res. 13(4) 411Г454.
Bakos, Y., E. Brynjolfsson. 1999. Bundling information goods: Pricing, profits and efficiency. Management Sci. 45(12) 1613Г1630.
Bakos, Y., E. Brynjolfsson. 2000a. Aggregation and disaggregation of information goods: Implications for bundling, site licensing and micropayment systems. D. Hurley, B. Kahin, H. R. Varian, eds. Internet Publishing and Beyond: The Economics of Digital Information and Intellectual Property. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 114Г137.
Bakos, Y., E. Brynjolfsson. 2000b. Bundling and competition on the Internet. Marketing Sci. 19(1) 63Г82.
Eppen, G. D., W. A. Hanson, R. K. Martin. 1991. Bundling--New products, new markets, low risk. Sloan Management Rev. 32(4) 7Г14.

Geng, X., M. B. Stinchcombe, A. B. Whinston. 2005. Bundling information goods of decreasing value. Management Sci. 51(4) 662Г667.
Ghosh, B., S. Balachander. 2007. Competitive bundling and counterbundling with generalist and specialist firms. Management Sci. 53(1) 159Г168.
Hanson, W., R. K. Martin. 1990. Optimal bundle pricing. Management Sci. 36(2) 155Г174.
Harris, J., E. A. Blair. 2006. Consumer preference for product bundles: The role of reduced search costs. J. Acad. Marketing Sci. 34(4) 506Г513.
Hitt, L. M., P. Chen. 2005. Bundling with customer self-selection: A simple approach to bundling low-marginal-cost goods. Management Sci. 51(10) 1481Г1493.
Radas, S., S. M. Shugan. 1998. Managing service demand: Shifting and bundling. J. Service Res. 1(1) 47Г64.
Rust, R., T. S. Chung. 2006. Marketing models of service and relationships. Marketing Sci. 25(6) 560Г580.
Sankaranarayanan, R. 2007. Innovation and durable goods monopolist: The optimality of frequent new-version releases. Marketing Sci. 26(6) 774Г791.
Schmalensee, R. 1984. Gaussian demand and commodity bundling. J. Bus. 57(1) S211ГS230.
Simonin, B. L., J. A. Ruth. 1995. Bundling as a strategy for new product introduction: Effects on consumers' reservation prices for the bundle, the new product, and its tie-in. J. Bus. Res. 33(3) 219Г230.
Stremersch, S., G. J. Tellis. 2002. Strategic bundling of products and prices: A new synthesis for marketing. J. Marketing 66(1) 55Г72.
Sujan, M. 1985. Consumer knowledge: Effects on evaluation strategies mediating consumer judgments. J. Consumer Res. 12(1) 31Г46.
Venkatesh, R., R. Chatterjee. 2006. Bundling, unbundling and pricing of multiform products: The case of magazine content. J. Interactive Marketing 20(2) 21Г40.
Venkatesh, R., W. Kamakura. 2003. Optimal bundling and pricing under a monopoly: Contrasting complements and substitutes from independently valued products. J. Bus. 76(2) 211Г231.
Venkatesh, R., V. Mahajan. 1993. A probabilistic approach to pricing a bundle of products or services. J. Marketing Res. 30(4) 494Г508.
Yadav, M. S., K. B. Monroe. 1993. How buyers perceive savings in a bundle price: An examination of a bundle's transaction value. J. Marketing Res. 30(3) 350Г358.

