Vol. 28, No. 3, May­June 2009, pp. 526­540 issn 0732-2399 eissn 1526-548X 09 2803 0526

informs ®
doi 10.1287/mksc.1080.0423 © 2009 INFORMS

Financing as a Marketing Strategy
S. Hun Seog
Graduate School of Finance, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Dongdaemun-Gu, Seoul 130-012, Korea, seogsh@business.kaist.ac.kr
Yong J. Hyun
Graduate School of Management, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Dongdaemun-Gu, Seoul 130-012, Korea, yhyun@business.kaist.ac.kr
This paper investigates the issues concerning a film producer that finances production costs not only by the conventional funding from an institutional investor, but also by "Internet funding," financing through the Internet from so-called netizen investors. In Internet funding, netizen investors engage in word-of-mouth activities. Assuming that information asymmetry exists between the producer and investors, we investigate how the Internet funding size varies with the word-of-mouth effect, the monitoring effect of the institutional investor, and the bargaining power of the producer over investors. When the producer has no bargaining power, the Internet funding size is determined by balancing the word-of-mouth effect with the monitoring effect by the institutional investment. If there is no word-of-mouth effect, there may be no Internet funding, because netizen investors interpret Internet funding as an indicator of a negative profit. When the producer has high bargaining power, full Internet funding is possible if the information asymmetry of the film quality is resolved. We discuss how information asymmetry can be resolved by the monitoring of the film quality, the producer's reputation, or the insurance on investment returns. Our model helps to capture several interesting aspects of Internet funding in the Korean film industry.
Key words: Internet fund; word of mouth; monitoring; bargaining power; film production History: Received: March 29, 2006; accepted: March 19, 2008; processed by Rajeev Tyagi. Published online in
Articles in Advance January 7, 2009.

1. Introduction
Internet funding refers to financing through the Internet from many small individual investors, so-called netizen investors (see Perold and Bhow 2000 for an example). One noteworthy aspect of Internet funding is that a firm can use it for the purpose of marketing as well as financing. Netizen investors can engage in word-of-mouth (WOM) activities that lead to the stimulation of the market demand for the business in which they invest. Although Internet funding has recently received a lot of attention, the amount of funding still remains small in general. This paper attempts to find answers to the following questions: What is the optimal amount (proportion) of Internet funding? Should the producer finance fully through the Internet? What are main determinants for optimal Internet funding size?
In the film industry, the WOM effects of Internet funding can be potentially significant. Being consumers of the film they financially support, netizen investors actively and positively talk to others about the film, thereby stimulating the demand for it. Followed by Japan, for example, Korea has pioneered Internet funding to finance film production. As shown in Appendix A, most of the Korean films

listed in Table A.1 finance a relatively small fraction of the film production cost. This observation casts doubt on whether film producers use Internet funding for financial purposes. In fact, Internet funding is often discussed in relation to marketing functions in practice. A lot of cases of Internet funding in the Korean film industry are reported to be initiated mainly for the purpose of marketing rather than financing (Economic Review 2005). A Korean newspaper once reported how aggressively netizen investors engaged in WOM activities with respect to the film they invested in (Dong-A Ilbo 2001). Kim and Seog (2006) find evidence for the WOM effect of Internet funding.
Internet funding for the WOM effect would grab more of the market's attention for the following reasons. It induces WOM activities on the Internet, so-called eWOM activities, as well as those in offline settings. As information technology rapidly advances, eWOM activities spread quickly and widely (Dellarocas and Narayan 2006, Liu 2006, Mayzlin 2005). It is reported that awareness created by eWOM is an effective predictor of sales (Dellarocas and Narayan 2006, Liu 2006). Recently, people are becoming more likely to be engaged in eWOM activities. For example, 33 million American Internet users reviewed

526

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

527

or rated someone or something as part of an online rating system (Lenhart et al. 2004).
Thus, it is worthwhile to develop knowledge about Internet funding for the WOM effect. This knowledge helps marketing managers find an efficient way to promote the market demand for their products. However, as we mention later, little research has been conducted to explain how Internet funding is related to the WOM effect. Although a very large volume of research exists that concerns WOM by consumers, its findings do not seem to fully shed light on netizen investors' WOM and its effects.
This paper considers the Internet funding models in the context of the film industry. Traditionally, producers have financed production costs from a small number of institutional (or large) investors, including major studios. Producers can benefit from Internet funding in several ways when compared with financing from institutional investors. First, because the number of investors is large in Internet funding, investment risks are diversified, which leads to cost-efficient financing (see Chapter 7 of Brealey et al. 2006). Second, unlike large institutional investors, small investors will not have incentives to monitor the film production, which provides the producer with more freedom in film making.1 Third, Internet funding can also help to increase film revenue through WOM by netizen investors as discussed above.
Among these benefits, this paper concerns the effect of WOM on Internet funding.2 We investigate how the Internet funding size is determined when a film producer can finance production costs not only by the conventional funding from an institutional investor, but also by Internet funding. We assume that information asymmetry exists between the producer and investors regarding film quality and efforts of the producer. However, the institutional investor is assumed to be able to monitor the producer more efficiently than the netizen investors. Under these assumptions, this paper presents the following findings.
When the producer has no bargaining power so that he cannot participate in profit sharing, and when the WOM effect does not increase as the fund size increases, netizen investors are not willing to invest in the film that seeks Internet funding. On the other hand, a film in which investors are willing to invest
1 This is a result of a free-riding problem (Grossman and Hart 1980). This lack of monitoring, however, will eventually impose costs to the producer, because rational investors will take it into account in investment decision making. This aspect will be intensively investigated in this paper.
2 Although other advantages may contribute to the popularity of Internet funding, the marketing effect has not received attention in marketing or finance literature. This paper should be understood as a work to emphasize the WOM effect, not to deny other advantages.

never seeks Internet funding. As a result, no Internet funding is possible. On the other hand, netizen investors will participate in Internet funding when the WOM effect increases as the fund size increases. In this case, the optimal funding size is determined by balancing the WOM effect of Internet funding with the monitoring effect by the institutional investor. The Internet funding size is lower when a smaller number of netizen investors are needed to create the WOM effect, or when greater monitoring by the institutional investor is needed.
When the producer has bargaining power high enough to share a large proportion of the profit, full financing through Internet funding is possible. In this situation, monitoring the producer is not needed as long as information asymmetry is resolved with respect to the film quality. The information asymmetry can be resolved, for example, by a third party's endorsement of the film quality, the producer's reputation, or the system to insure a certain level of return on netizen investment.
This study sheds light on how to formulate the strategy to benefit from WOM. For example, once an innovative product is launched, early adopters engage in WOM activities to persuade laggards to purchase the product. In this diffusion process, it is difficult to obtain a sufficient number of early adopters to maximize the WOM effect. It is sometimes very expensive to find those who could be early adopters and effectively promote them to engage in WOM activities. If applicable, however, inducing target buyers to invest in the business may be an efficient way to obtain early adopters. In this respect, the present study helps to determine how to obtain early adopters to promote market demand.
This study also points to a more general fact, that financial activities can be instrumental in achieving marketing objectives. An example of our results is the well-documented initial public offering (IPO) underpricing phenomenon. One possible reason for this underpricing is to achieve a marketing objective. Underpricing attracts more investors in the IPO, which leads to a higher concern for the firm and its products (Ritter and Welch 2002). Firms have the incentive to underprice their IPO stocks if the marketing effect is greater than the losses due to underpricing. In another case, a firm may make important suppliers become its shareholders. As shareholders, the suppliers will align their interests with those of the firm, making it unlikely that they will supply their products to competitors of the firm (see the example of Autodaq.com in Zingales 2000).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review. Then, a simple model of Internet funding is developed for

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

528

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

the situation in which the producer has no bargaining power (§3). The model is extended to the case in which the institutional investor has priority in revenue-sharing arrangements (§4). Then, we investigate how the reputation and bargaining power of the producer can increase the Internet funding size (§5). Section 6 discusses the results of the analyses. Section 7 concludes the paper.

Chintagunta 1999). In general, marketing efforts are known to be positively related to the box office performance (Sochay 1994, Prag and Casavant 1994). Moreover, the WOM effect is potentially significant on the Internet, because information spreads rapidly and the interactions among netizens are extensive (Mayzlin 2005). This literature provides a background for the assumption that Internet funding can be used as a WOM tool in the film industry.

2. Literature Review
An extensive literature review indicates that researchers in both marketing and finance have paid little attention to the aforementioned issues. Thus, this study contributes to both literatures because it deals with the case that financing itself is directly used as a marketing strategy. The following is to summarize major research streams concerned with both marketing and finance.
In marketing, a significant volume of research has been conducted to investigate firm/shareholder values or performance measures as related to marketing activities in diverse situation (e.g., Anderson et al. 2004, Bolton 2004, Fornell et al. 2006, Gruca and Rego 2005, Joseph and Richardson 2002, Narayanan et al. 2004, Srivastava et al. 1998). However, other issues related to both marketing and finance have received little attention in the marketing literature. In finance, the relationships between financial and other functional activities have been investigated since Modigliani and Miller (1958) (e.g., Jensen and Meckling 1976, Myers and Majluf 1984, and Brander and Lewis 1986, among others). However, the main focus has been that financial contracts lead to incentive distortions or opportunistic behavior by decision makers, which, in turn, affects the firm's functional activities. Few studies on finance focus on the fact that financing plays a role in marketing. Thus, this study contributes to the literature in both marketing and finance because it deals with the case in which financing itself is directly used as a marketing strategy.
Another related strand of literature is concerned with the WOM effect in the film industry.3 The WOM effect is believed to have a significant effect in the film industry, because a film is a cultural and experience product, and the major portion of revenue is earned during the first few weeks of its exhibition (Bayus 1985, De Vany and Walls 1999, Faber and O'Guinn 1984, Liu 2006, Neelamegham and
3 The WOM effect is an important marketing factor in other industries (for example, see Rust and Chung 2006, Van den Bulte and Joshi 2007). The characteristics of the film, such as its short life cycle and cultural significance, have attracted intensive research in the market literature (see Eliashberg et al. 2006).

3. A Simple Model
We present a model of film production where a producer needs to finance the production costs, C. In §§3 and 4, we assume that the producer has no bargaining power, so that all the profit of a film is distributed to investors. Section 5 will consider the case in which the producer has some bargaining power. The financial success of a film depends on the quality (q) of the film and the efforts (e) made by the producer. Quality is of the scenario, directors, and staffs. We assume that both quality and efforts are not observable by investors, ex ante.
The film may have good quality (type G) or bad quality (type B). The ex ante probability of good quality is denoted by p0. Given its type, a film may generate high (H) or low (L) revenues. Without the WOM effect that will be considered later, the realized revenue of the film, V , can have one of the four values denoted by VGH VGL VBH , or VBL, depending on the level of the film quality and the realized revenue.4 We assume that VGH > VGL VBH > VBL. The effort of the producer affects the probability of high revenue, which is denoted by r. We assume that the higher the effort, the greater the probability of high revenue. We consider two types of investors, an institutional investor and netizen investors. All investors are assumed to be risk neutral.5
The film-financing game proceeds as follows. A producer has a film to make (stage 1). He first finances the production costs from the institutional investor (stage 2), then from netizen investors through Internet funding for the remaining portion (stage 3).6 Once financing is successful, the producer makes the film that generates revenues (stage 4). The revenue is affected by the film quality, the producer's effort,
4 The revenue V can be interpreted as the revenue net of the producer's effort costs. Thus, the producer is already paid for his effort, thereby making his profit zero without further profit sharing.
5 This assumption rules out the diversification advantage of Internet funding mentioned in the introduction.
6 This financing order reflects the actual financing process. This ordering can be endogenously developed because netizens will not invest unless the institutional investor commits to the investment, as will be clear later. Committing to the investment is technically equivalent to investing first.

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS
and the WOM effect. The earned revenue is distributed to the producer, the institutional investor, and netizen investors based on the contracts (stage 5). We assume that the market for Internet funding is competitive, so that netizen investors are passive in that they will participate in investment as long as they earn fair returns. The fair returns are assumed to be zero throughout this paper. On the other hand, the institutional investor is active in that she will determine her investment share a, and costs m for monitoring the quality and the producer's effort. Contracts are determined by the negotiations between the producer and the institutional investor (in stage 2).
The monitoring of quality revises the probability of good quality from p0 to p or pL, where pL < p0 < p. For analytic convenience, we assume that p0 is too low for the institutional investor to invest in the film, so that the institutional investor considers investment only when the revealed probability is p. However, netizen investors do not directly observe the information.7
The monitoring of the producer's effort by the institutional investor can affect the probability of high revenue. For this, we assume that the probability of high revenue of a film is a function of the monitoring cost: r = r m is the probability of high revenue under monitoring costs m.8 This assumption allows us to work directly with monitoring costs instead of dealing with efforts. We assume that r 0 = 0, r m > 0, and r m < 0. Because the monitoring activity occurs during production, the netizen investors cannot directly observe m (thus, r m ) at the time of funding.
Netizen investors may collectively invest in the remaining share of 1 - a. The share of each netizen investor is very small. Unlike the institutional investor, netizen investors have no incentive to monitor the producer, because their share of the film is too small to benefit from the monitoring, which is a typical free-riding problem (see, e.g., Grossman and Hart 1980).
Even though small netizen investors do not monitor the producer's effort, they may affect the revenue of the film through WOM. To capture this idea, let
7 Even though the netizen investors do not directly observe the information, they can infer the information if the institutional investor invests.
8 A more complete analysis would require an explicit modeling of the relationship between monitoring and efforts. However, because our focus is on the relationship between a WOM effect and monitoring in Internet funding, we simply reflect the standard results of the moral hazard literature into r m , without explicitly modeling that issue.

529
us represent the WOM effect by k a .9 We assume that the WOM effect amplifies the revenue in a multiplicative manner, so that k a V is the realized revenue under the presence of the WOM effect k a . Although the WOM effect may exhibit diverse patterns depending on circumstances, we simplify our analysis by assuming that the WOM effect is nonnegative, and is nondecreasing as the share of netizen investors, 1 - a, increases (or equivalently, nonincreasing as the share of the institutional investor, a, increases). Technically, we assume that k a 1, where k a  0, k a  0.10 Note that k a = 1 for all a if the WOM effect does not exist.
The realized profit of the film is denoted by = k a V - C, given a, q, and e. Then, the expected profit from the film is: E = k a E V - C, where E V = p rVGH + 1 - r VGL + 1 - p rVBH + 1 - r VBL . Note that the probability of high quality is assumed to be p, because the institutional investor is willing to invest only in that case. As a benchmark, let us first find the secondbest outcome, given the relationship between monitoring and the probability of high revenue.11 By solving the maximization problem of total profit kE V - C - m given the monitoring technology r m , we obtain the second-best solutions: aSB = 0, and mSB satisfies kr W - 1 = 0, where W = p VGH - VGL + 1 - p VBH - VBL > 0. Intuition for this result is clear. The WOM effect is maximized by a = 0, and the monitoring level is determined by balancing its benefits and costs. The following analysis shows that this second-best outcome is not obtained in general. Now, let us first consider the institutional investor's problem. Assuming the participation of netizen
9 Even though we simplify our analysis by expressing the WOM effect as a function of a, the details of the WOM effects can be complicated. For example, the WOM effect may depend on the number of investors and their invested amounts. WOM may also interact with other marketing activities of the producer. Moreover, consumers may disregard the recommendations of netizen investors once they take into account the netizen investors' WOM activities. In this case, the WOM effect will be small or even negative. Although these issues are important, they are beyond the scope of this paper.
10 The assumption of the global concavity of k a is solely for analytic convenience. As we will see later, the assumption leads to the global concavity of ak a , which is convenient, but not crucial, for our results. What we need is that an optimal interior solution a to the maximization problem of §2.1 exists in the area of concave ak a , which holds even if ak a is not globally concave.
11 Note that our problem involves two information problems, the producer's effort and the monitoring of the institutional investor. Because we treat the information problem in the producer's effort as given, and focus on the monitoring incentives, a second-best solution is one that maximizes the total profit, given the information problem in the producer's effort.

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

530

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

investors, the institutional investor will solve the following problem:12

Max U a m  aE - m
oa1 m

= a kE V - C - m

(1)

Let us define (a m) as the solution to this problem. For an interior solution, we have the following firstorder conditions (FOCs):

Ua = 0

k + ak E V - C = 0

(2)

Um = 0

akr W - 1 = 0

We may obtain corner solutions (a = 0 or 1) if Ua  0 at a = 0, or Ua  0 at a = 1. We assume that m satisfies the second FOC for a > 0.13 It is obvious that m = 0 for a = 0. It is important to note that a
higher proportion of investment by the institutional
investor is associated with a higher monitoring level
and a higher profit of the film (see [B.1] in Appendix B
for a formal proof). This is because the institutional
investor will increase her investment and monitoring
of the producer's effort when the film becomes more
profitable.
Next, turn to the netizen investor's problem. Suppose that the institutional investor determines (a m) as discussed above. If (a m) is to be obtained in
equilibrium, netizen investors should provide the remaining share 1 - a of the funds. Whereas each
individual netizen investor will invest an infinitesi-
mal share, the sum of profits for individual netizen investors is (1 - a)E . Now, an individual netizen investor will invest if E  0. That is, the netizen investor invests if and only if kE V  - C  0, where k  k a and E V   E V under a and m.
On the other hand, the institutional investor will invest if a kE V  - C - m  0 or, a kE V  - C  m  0. Thus, netizen investors have incentives to
invest as long as the institutional investor is willing
to invest. The following proposition summarizes the
findings regarding the existence of Internet funding.

Proposition 1. (i) Internet funding exists as long as the institutional investor, ignoring the netizens' decision, is willing to invest partially in the film (i.e., 0 < a < 1).
(ii) If the WOM effect of the Internet fund does not increase as the fund size increases, then Internet funding cannot exist.

12 Note that we formulate the problem such that the utility of the institutional investor is maximized, because we assume that the producer has no bargaining power in this section.
13 Under the usual assumption that r 0 is very high and limm r m = 0, we can guarantee that there exists a unique m satisfying the second FOC, for a > 0.

(iii) If the WOM effect of the Internet fund increases only at finite points, then Internet funding may exist only at those finite points.
Proof. See Appendix B. Proposition 1(i) is clear because netizen investors are willing to invest as long as the institutional investor invests. Proposition 1(ii) reports an interesting finding when the WOM effect is constant (k a = 0). Intuitively, when it is constant, or does not increase as the fund size grows, the increase in Internet funding may only lower the profit of the film as the institutional investor's incentives for monitoring decreases. As a result, as long as the film is profitable, the institutional investor will invest fully. Therefore, the opportunity for Internet funding exists only if the film is not profitable. Knowing this, netizen investors refuse to provide funds. Proposition 1(iii) shows that if the WOM effect increases only at finite points, i.e., k a is a step function, then Internet funding may exist only at those finite points.14 A step function is composed of horizontal lines with jumps. Thus, in each of these horizontal lines, the WOM effect arises only at the ends of the horizontal line. According to Proposition 1(ii), Internet funding is possible only at the end of each horizontal line. Proposition 1(iii) points to the finding of the WOM literature that the WOM effect generally needs a critical mass, or a tipping point (see Buchanan 2002, Rogers 1995). Simply put, when the informed population is less (more) than the tipping point, the WOM effect will disappear (be present). Such a tipping point can be considered as a jump point in a step function. Therefore, Proposition 1(iii) implies that Internet funding may arise only at the tipping point. If the Internet facilitates the word-ofmouth effect, then we may suppose that the tipping point is low in Internet funding (see Mayzlin 2005). Then the Internet funding will be low, even if it exists.
4. Priority of the Institutional Investor in Revenue-Sharing Arrangements
It is often the case that the institutional investor has priority in revenue sharing. Moreover, unlike the institutional investor, netizen investors may not participate in the sharing of full profits generated by the film, which include TV and video rights and the sales from original soundtrack albums. Reflecting this priority, we assume that the institutional investor receives portion t of the revenue, which may differ from a.15 Now, the utilities of
14 When k a is a step function, the assumption of differentiability is applied piecewise.
15 Unlike in the previous section, it is, in principle, possible that the institutional investor may deceive the netizen investors by

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

531

the institutional investor and netizen investors become tkE V - aC - m, and 1 - t kE V - 1 - a C, respectively. We continue to hold the assumption that the producer has no bargaining power so that all the profit of a film is distributed to investors.
Two cases may exist in revenue-sharing arrangements. First, t is a function of a, which is exogenously given. In this case, the revenue-sharing rule is assumed to be determined by the forces outside of the institutional investor's control, such as social norms or competition. The institutional investor will determine a, considering its effect on t. Second, t as well as a may be endogenously determined by the institutional investor. As t increases, ceteris paribus, netizen investors' profit will decrease, whereas the institutional investor's profit increases. The institutional investor should consider this trade-off in determining t, because netizen investors will invest only if their profits are nonnegative.

4.1. Exogenous Revenue-Sharing Arrangements We assume that t is a function of a, which is exogenously given, and is public information. Let t = t a , where t a  a, t 0 = 0, t 1 = 1; t 0  1, t 1  1; t  0. These assumptions are justified by the following observation. The institutional investor has bargaining power over the netizen investors only if she invests a positive amount (t 0 = 0). The bargaining power enables her to appropriate netizen investors' pro rata revenue share (t a  a). The marginal appropriation is great (small) where the netizen investors' share is large (small) (t 0  1, t 1  1). For simplicity, we assume that t a is decreasing in a (t a  0).
Now, let us consider the institutional investor's decision. Ignoring the netizen investors' decision, the institutional investor will solve the following problem:

Max U a m = t a kE V - aC - m

(3)

am

Let us define (a, m) as the solution to this problem. For an interior solution, we have the following FOCs:

Ua = 0

t k + tk E V - C = 0

(4)

Um = 0

tkr W - 1 = 0

Similar to §3, we can show that, for interior solutions, the institutional investor will increase the investment in and monitoring of the film in the relevant range when the film is more profitable (see Appendix B).

investing in a film with a low expected profit, because the profit share is different from the cost share. However, we rule out this possibility by assuming that the institutional investor does not cheat, simplifying the analysis.

Thus, a higher share for the institutional investor indicates a higher monitoring level and a higher profit of the film.
On the other hand, the total profit of netizen investors is 1 - t kE V - 1 - a C. Thus, individual netizen investors invest if and only if
1 - t kE V - 1 - a C  0 or (5)
1 - t / 1 - a  C/ kE V
Note that the institutional investor participates in investing if and only if
tkE V - aC  m or (6)
t/a  C/ kE V + m/ akE V
Comparison between (5) and (6) shows that if the difference between t a and a is large, the interest of institutional investors and netizen investors is more likely to be incongruent, so that (5) may not hold, even if (6) holds. In this case, netizen investors do not want to invest even if the institutional investor is willing to invest. Although the interest congruency also depends on variables such as C, k, and E V , the following observations can be noted.
Lemma 1. (i) Netizen investors do not necessarily want to invest even if the institutional investor is willing to invest.
(ii) Netizen investors will not invest if the institutional investor does not invest.
(iii) Netizen investors are willing to invest if the investment share of the institutional investor is sufficiently high.
Proof. See Appendix B. If (5) does not hold for 0 < a < 1, then the institutional investor's decision cannot be fulfilled in equilibrium. In this case, the institutional investor should change her decision. Because (a m) does not necessarily hold in equilibrium, let us denote (ap mp) for the equilibrium share and monitoring. Then, we have the following results.
Proposition 2. When the institutional investor has an exogenous privilege in the revenue sharing (t = t a ), the following statements hold in equilibrium.
(i) The institutional investor's share ap is a the solution to Problem 3 if a satisfies both 5 and 6 .
(ii) The institutional investor's share ap is less than one and different from a, if a satisfies 6 but not 5 . No Internet funding exists when ap = 0.
(iii) The institutional investor's share ap is zero, if a does not satisfy 6 . In this case, no Internet funding exists.
Proof. See Appendix B. Lemma 1 and Proposition 2 show that netizen investors' investment decisions critically depend on the institutional investor's. Netizen investors are willing to invest when the institutional investor takes a

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

532

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

high proportion of investment, because it indicates that the film is profitable and the appropriation by the institutional investor is not great. As described in the previous section, netizen investors will not invest if the institutional investor does not invest at all. The producer cannot finance the film cost fully from Internet funding. Note that the Internet funding is possible even if the WOM effect of the Internet fund is constant. This is because the revenuesharing portion t varies exogenously depending on the investment share a. Even if a film is profitable, full investment does not necessarily maximize the institutional investor's utility if the revenue share does not increase sufficiently enough to offset the increase in investment costs. As a result, the institutional investor may not invest fully in a profitable film, even if the WOM effect is constant.

4.2. Endogenous Revenue-Sharing Arrangements We consider the case in which the institutional investor determines t, independently of a. This case is more applicable than the case of exogenous revenuesharing arrangements where netizen investors have no bargaining power at all, because the revenuesharing rule is determined by the bargaining power. Now, we may state the problem of the institutional investor as follows:

Max tkE V - aC - m
amt

s.t. 1 - t kE V - 1 - a C = 0

(7)

tkr W - 1 = 0

The first constraint implies that the profit of netizen investors is zero. Note that netizen investors will invest if and only if the profit is nonnegative; 1 - t kE V - 1 - a C  0. This profit, however, cannot be strictly positive in equilibrium, because the institutional investor can increase her profit by increasing t. Therefore, in equilibrium, we have 1 - t kE V - 1 - a C = 0, which still attracts netizen investors. The second constraint is the FOC where the institutional investor selects m, given t and a, to maximize her own profit. This constraint takes into account the opportunistic behavior in monitoring.16 Let us denote the solution for the problem by (aep mep tep). By plugging the first constraint into the objective function, the problem can be simplified as follows:

Max kE V - C - m

amt

(8)

s.t. tkr W - 1 = 0

16 If the institutional investor can commit to her monitoring strategy, then this second constraint is not needed. In general, however, monitoring after funding provides her with the incentives to opportunistically select a monitoring level.

The Lagrangian is derived as follows, where is the Lagrange multiplier to the constraint:
L = kE V - C - m
+ kE V - 1 - a C r W /E V - 1 (9)
An interior solution should satisfy the following FOCs:
La = k E V + k E V + C r W /E V = 0
Lm = kr W - 1 + kE V 2r W + 1 - a CW (10)
· r 2W - r E V /E V 2 = 0
The profit of the institutional investor becomes tkE V - aC - m = kE V - C - 1 - t kE V - 1 - a C - m = kE V - C - m. Even if her profit is kE V - C - m in equilibrium, the result is not a second-best one, because she will opportunistically select m after t and a are determined (as implied by the constraint). The following results are obtained from the FOCs.
Proposition 3. When the institutional investor has an endogenous privilege in revenue sharing, the following statements hold in equilibrium.
(i) Internet funding exists if the institutional investor invests (less than fully) in the film (0 < aep < 1).
(ii) If the WOM effect of the Internet fund does not increase as the fund size increases, then Internet funding does not exist.
(iii) If the WOM effect of the Internet fund increases only at finite points, then Internet funding may exist only at those finite points.
Proof. See Appendix B. Because the solution to problem (8) always satisfies the nonnegative profit condition for netizen investors, Internet funding exists as long as 0 < aep < 1. In addition, Internet funding may also exist for aep = 0 if the participation of the institutional investor as a monitor is public information at the time of funding.17 This is because the institutional investor may have the incentive to monitor (mep > 0) even though aep = 0, because she can still participate in profit sharing.18
17 The caveat that the participation of the institutional investor as a monitor is public information at the time of Internet funding is crucial. Note that the institutional investor will not monitor the producer if the revised probability of high quality is pL. Therefore, a = 0 does not necessarily imply that m > 0. Because netizens cannot observe the revised probability, there is a possibility that the producer has incentives to deceive netizens if netizens believe that there will be monitoring. In this case, rational netizens may not invest when a = 0. This concern leads to the consideration of the reputation of the producer and the monitor in the next section. 18 This case may look awkward because it implies the institutional investor still has full bargaining power without investing at all. In principle, however, it is possible because monitoring itself provides great values. We will discuss this issue in the next section.

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

533

Interestingly, the Internet funding is still not possible if k a is a constant (Proposition 3(ii)). The intuition is as follows. Note first that the profit for the institutional investor is kE V - C - m, which is equal to the total profit. Given m, this profit is not affected by a because k a is constant. Because full profit sharing provides the institutional investor with the full incentive to monitor the producer, it is optimal to set a = 1, as long as the film is profitable. However, in this case, Internet funding does not exist. Proposition 3(iii) is a general case of Proposition 3(ii), implying that Internet funding may arise only at the tipping point. Because this case is the same as Proposition 1(iii), please refer to the discussion following Proposition 1 for its intuitions and implications.
5. Third-Party Monitoring, Reputation, and the Bargaining Power of the Producer
So far, we have assumed that the institutional investor has full bargaining power and all profits are distributed to investors. The producer plays a passive role in profit sharing. Capturing the fact that the producer generally recoups his payoff before distributing profit,19 this assumption allows us to focus on the interest incongruence between the institutional investor and netizen investors. This case is plausible, for example, when the producer is an entrant or has not produced a successful film. However, the producer can have bargaining power if he is recognized as a profitable film maker. In addition, the aforementioned case of endogenous revenue-sharing arrangements allows the institutional investor to have full bargaining power even if her investment share is zero or very small. Being theoretically possible, it is unrealistic to assume that an investor with a zero share has full bargaining power.
In general, the producer and the institutional investor are likely to share profit based on their relative bargaining power, whereas netizen investors make zero expected profits. For this, let us consider the case of endogenous revenue-sharing arrangements, and suppose that the institutional investor and the producer share the profit net of the share of netizen investors.
Let us denote s = s1 s2 , where 0  s1 s2  1, for the linear sharing rule between the producer and the institutional investor, which is determined based on their relative bargaining power.20 By this sharing rule,
19 In this interpretation, we can consider V as the revenue net of the producer's costs.
20 We avoid the explicit modeling of determination of the sharing rule. In principle, the precise sharing rule will be also endogenously determined by each party's bargaining power and states of nature,

s1 tkEV - aC - s2m is the share for the institutional investor, the remaining 1 - s1 tkEV - aC - 1 - s2 m is the share for the producer.21 We assume that (s1 s2) is public information at the time of Internet funding.
It is reasonable to suppose that s1 and s2 have the same sign; s2 > 0 if and only if s1 > 0.22
Now we need to consider the incentive effect of
the sharing rules on the producer's effort. Recall that
the probability of the high revenue was a function
of monitoring costs only, r m , in previous sections.
However, this probability is affected by the shar-
ing rules. Because the marginal effect of the pro-
ducer's effort on the profit share of the producer is through 1 - s1 tkEV - aC , we may presume that s2 does not directly affect the producer's effort.23 Thus,
the probability of the high revenue can be denoted by r m s1 . With this notation, note that r m = r m 1 . We assume that rm = r m s1 / m  0, rs1 = r m s1 / s1  0. In words, the probability of the high revenue increases as the institutional investor monitors more and the profit share of the producer (1 - s1) becomes higher.
We assume that the maximum of r m s1 is obtained at s1 = 0, regardless of m. In this assumption, s1 = 0 implies that the producer takes all increases in the profit that follows the increases in the producer's
effort. Therefore, the producer maximizes the probability of high revenue when s1 = 0, even without the monitoring of his effort.
Given that s1 s2 > 0, a second-best solution (aSB mSB ) is obtained as follows: aSB = 0; and mSB solves krmW - 1 = 0.24 Now the producer (not the institutional investor) finds a solution (as ms ts) to
the following problem:

Max
amt

1 - s1 tkE V - aC - 1 - s2 m

s.t. 1 - t kE V - 1 - a C = 0

(11)

s1tkrmW - s2 = 0

among others, which is beyond our concern. We simply presume that the relative bargaining power exogenously determines the sharing rules.
21 Even though contract theory says that the optimal contract should be more complicated than this linear rule, the linear sharing rule is commonly used in practice. This discrepancy between theory and practice is well recognized in the contract literature (see Holmström and Milgrom 1987). However, we do not deal with this issue, because it is beyond our concern.
22 That s1 > 0 and s2 = 0 implies that the institutional investor participates in profit sharing with all monitoring costs imposed on the producer. That s1 = 0 and s2 > 0 implies that the institutional investor incurs monitoring costs without participating in profit sharing. Neither case is reasonable or interesting.
23 However, s2 can indirectly affect the effort of the producer because it affects the monitoring level.
24 The solution (aSB mSB ) is none other than the second-best solution aSB mSB) of §2, except that r is replaced by rm.

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

534

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

where the constraints represent the participation of
netizen investors and the optimal monitoring selection of the institutional investor.25 From the constraints, we have t = kEV - 1 - a C / kE V and s2 = s1tkrmW . By plugging the expressions for t and s2 into the objective function, the problem can be simplified as

Max am

1

- s1

kE V

-C

- 1 - s1rmW kE V - 1 - a C /E V m (12)

FOCs to this problem are

La = 1 - s1 k E V + s1rmW k E V + C m/E V = 0

Lm = 1-s1 krmW - 1-s1rmW kE V - 1-a C /E V
+ s1rmWm krmWE V - rmW kE V
- 1 - a C /E V 2 = 0
(13)
From the FOCs, we can find several interesting points. First, the second-best outcome is not obtained: as = 0, and ms does not satisfy krmW - 1 = 0, in general. Second, the Internet funding may not exist when k = 0. With k = 0, FOC becomes La = s1rmWCm/E V  0. Thus, as = 1, implying that there is no funding from netizen investors. Therefore, when the WOM effect of the Internet fund does not increase as the fund size increases, then the opportunity for investment will be given to netizen investors, only if the film is not profitable.
Third, if s1 is low enough, then we have La  0 and as = 0, implying that 100% Internet funding is optimal. When the bargaining power of the producer is sufficiently high, the producer can finance fully through netizen investors. In this case, the institutional investor does not make an investment, but still monitors the producer's effort. Thus, the institutional investor should be interpreted as a third-party monitor. Netizen investors may be willing to fully invest in the film, because the institutional investor monitors the producer's effort. Moreover, as a high share of the profit motivates the producer to make a greater effort, the need to monitor the producer's effort decreases. If, in addition, ts1 = s2, then the second constraint becomes krmW - 1 = 0, satisfying the second-best condition. With such (s1 s2), the equilibrium outcome coincides with the second-best outcome. In general, however, the equilibrium outcome will be different from the second-best outcome.

25 Note that, for equilibrium, the solution should further pass the nonnegative profit conditions for both the producer and the institutional investor, which holds when the probability of high quality is p.

Proposition 4. Suppose the profit-sharing rule s1 s2 is linear as described above and is public information at the time of funding, where s1, s2 > 0.
(1) If the WOM effect of the Internet fund does not increase as the fund size increases, then Internet funding cannot exist.
(2) If the producer has high bargaining power small s1 , then full Internet funding is possible. In this case, the institutional investor may play the role of a third-party monitor.
Proof. See the text above. An extreme but interesting case can be found if the producer has full bargaining power, or s1 = s2 = 0. In this case, the second constraint is not needed. The producer solves the following problem:

Max tkEV - aC - m

amt

(14)

s.t. 1 - t kE V - 1 - a C = 0

Equivalently,

Max kEV - C - m

(15)

am

The solutions are as = 0, ms = 0 because Lm = krmW - 1 = -1 < 0, for rm m 0 = 0. The producer can raise 100% of the required funds from netizen investors. In addition, the profit of the film is also maximized across the sharing rules: The revenue is maximized because r m s1 is maximized with s1 = 0. The monitoring cost is minimized because full profit sharing provides the producer with the full incentive to maximize the probability of the high revenue, regardless of the monitoring of the efforts.
However, there is a critical caveat to this conclusion. Recall that the above analysis implicitly assumes that the probability of high quality is high (p). This assumption is satisfied when the institutional investor is involved as a monitor because she monitors the producer's effort only if the film has a high probability of high quality. However, when the producer has full bargaining power, there is no monitoring of quality because the institutional investor is not involved. Therefore, the producer may have the incentive to deceive the investors if they believe that the probability of high quality is p, when the true probability is pL. This is a typical information asymmetry problem as pointed out by Akerlof (1970).26
Let us briefly discuss several solutions for this problem, suggested in the economics literature (Kreps 1990, for example). First, the problem may be resolved by independent and reputable individuals/institutions that monitor the film quality. The results of the monitoring should be available to investors at the time

26 This type of credibility problem of signals in marketing can also be found, for example, in decisions on placing sale signs (see Anderson and Simester 1998).

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

535

of funding. Another solution is for the producer to build up his reputation regarding film quality. Even though reputation is not built in a short period of time, once built up, it will resolve the information asymmetry problem.27 In addition, there are also contractual solutions. For example, insurance can work as a solution in which the producer guarantees a minimum payoff for investors. If the guarantee level is high enough, the producer will not have the incentives to deceive investors because a large portion of losses will be imposed on him (see Seog 2006 for the signaling role of insurance).28 In fact, any contractual mechanism that transfers the risk of the film's financial failure to the producer will effectively resolve the information asymmetry problem.
6. Discussion
The findings of this study explain why the Internet funding size is generally low in the Korean film market. (The average funding size is 7.7%, as shown in Table A.1 in the appendix.) Most film producers are small, with very low bargaining power.29 In general, institutional investors maintain high bargaining power over these producers. Given that the WOM effect has a low tipping point on the Internet, the proportion of Internet funding should be low, as predicted by our models in §§3 and 4.30 This study also supports the conventional belief that one of the main purposes of Internet funding is marketing rather than financing, as noted in the introduction.
Our analysis may explain why the film, A Good Lawyer's Wife, was able to raise a high proportion of Internet funding (over 70% of the production costs; see Table A.1 in Appendix A). First of all, the success of the Internet funding is mainly attributed to the reputation of the producer (see the discussion following Proposition 4 in §5). It is well recognized that the producer has enjoyed a high reputation for film
27 In our notation, when p0 is high enough for a producer, then there is no need to monitor the quality of his film.
28 An interesting case can be found if the producer has wealth too limited to fulfill the guarantee promise. In this case, insurance firms can play important roles in resolving this problem. Insurance firms will guarantee this promise with the exchange of proper insurance premiums. Insurance firms will also work as monitors, because losses are now imposed on them.
29 According to the Korean Film Council (http://www.kofic.or.kr), more than 1,500 producers are enrolled, although fewer than 100 films are produced a year. Fewer than 10 producers make more than one film a year. In addition, active producers closely interact with distributors who are also main institutional investors.
30 There is another force to lower the tipping point in the Korean film case. As an initial stage of Internet funding, its success gained a lot of media attention (see Appendix A). By reducing the funding size, the film may enjoy a quick success in funding, which increases the possibility of media attention.

quality and performance in the Korean film market. Another interesting feature of this successful Internet funding was that the producer offered insurance to guarantee the return of 70% of the invested amount. As shown in the discussion following Proposition 4, insurance reduces the information asymmetry problem. In sum, the offer of insurance and the reputation of the producer contributed to the success of Internet funding.31
Our results provide insights into the phenomenon that Internet funding plays a more important role in the music industry---involving pop song albums, concerts, and musicals--than in the film industry. According to the data available to the authors, the average Internet funding size in those areas is over 33%, which is much higher than 7.7% for the film industry. We believe that the difference comes from the fact that, compared with the film industry, the characteristics of the singers, the producer, and the repertories of the musicals are relatively well known, at least to their fans. This reduces the information asymmetry problem, leading to the larger Internet funding.
Recall that we mentioned in §1 several potential benefits from Internet funding. However, the low proportion of Internet funding implies that the cost efficiency following risk diversification is not a main reason for Internet funding, because risk is hardly well diversified with such a small funding size. It also implies that the freedom of film making is not an important reason for Internet funding, because the producer can hardly enjoy much freedom with such a high proportion of investment from institutional investors. Although we do not deny that risk diversification and the freedom of film making may help explain why the producer prefers Internet funding, our analysis indicates that the WOM effect seems to be an important rationale for the current patterns of Internet funding.
Because establishing a good reputation is difficult, a reliable monitoring system seems to be crucial for full Internet funding. New producers especially may find it very difficult to finance their films from existing institutional investors, possibly because of a limited capital pool. Internet funding, if possible, is a way to enlarge the capital pool. Although new producers may be the ones that need Internet funding most, the very lack of information about them also prevents netizen investors from investing in their films. Once an independent and reliable monitoring system
31 Note that the same producer also recently succeeded in fully financing another film, Hello Brother, by Internet funding in 2004, for the first time in history (not included in Table A.1 in the appendix). Internet funding for this film offers insurance that guarantees 80% of invested amount.

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

536

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

is established, we expect that Internet funding will become an effective financing tool, as well as a marketing one.32
7. Conclusion
This paper investigates the issues concerning a film producer that finances production costs not only by the conventional funding from an institutional investor, but also by Internet funding. We find that netizen investors contribute to achieving the marketing objective of a firm by creating the WOM effect, which broadens the scope of the WOM research in marketing. In the existing literature, those who engage in WOM activities are consumers. Netizen investors are a new type of people who engage in WOM activities in that they are not only consumers, but also investors. Thus, the WOM activities of netizen investors would be different from those of consumers. For example, netizen investors would more actively promote the product than those who merely consume the product. Therefore, the understanding of the WOM activities of netizen investors will help develop the marketing strategies of a firm. These strategies would save the marketing cost, while boosting sales more quickly. As Internet funding spreads globally, the importance of these strategies becomes more apparent.
Our analysis is limited in several aspects. First, the risk attitude of investors is ignored for analytic convenience. Although we believe that consideration of the risk attitude will not substantially change our main arguments, it may provide additional explanations for some aspects in film financing. For example, institutional investors may want netizen investors to invest to reduce their risk exposure, even if there is no WOM effect. Second, we assume that the WOM effect is (weakly) positively related with the size of Internet funding. In reality, the WOM effect is a complex function of diverse factors. There is a possibility that the WOM effect is negative if, for example, aggressive WOM creates antipathy.33 When the WOM effect is negative, it is obvious that no Internet funding exists for profitable films. However, more complicated cases can be found if we allow more realistic assumptions. For example, the WOM effect may depend on the number of investors and their invested amounts. WOM may also interact with other marketing activities of the producer. Moreover, consumers may disregard the recommendations of netizen investors once they take into account the netizen
32 For example, the monitoring system may resemble the evaluation system for listing of new firms on the NYSE or the NASDAQ.
33 We thank the referees for pointing out the possibility of negative effects and the credibility issues of WOM.

investors' WOM activities. Comprehensive considerations of consumers' reactions and the characteristics of netizen investors may be interesting topics for future research.
Acknowledgments The authors thank Jaemyung Shim, President of MK Pictures, for her helpful comments, and Ryunhee Kim for research assistance. They also thank Thi Nha Chau for her support.
Appendix A. Brief Description of the Internet Funding in the Korean Film Industry
The recent success (or, the "renaissance") of Korean films has received much attention from the media. The market share of Korean films in Korea was 50.1% (2001), 48.3% (2002), 53.5% (2003), 59.3% (2004), and 59.0% (2005) (Korean Film Council 2005).34 These numbers are compared with around 20% of market share in 1990.
The success of Korean films is attributed to several causes (Samjong KPMG Group 2002). First, the Korean government has played an important role in improving film production and distribution circumstances. Second, a large amount of capital has flowed into the film industry. Third, the introduction and growth of multiplex theatres such as "CGV" and "Megabox" has increased the number of screens. Fourth, it is often mentioned that Internet funds have contributed to the success of Korean films. With the development of the Internet, we have been able to observe a new form of funding in the film industry (called "Internet funding"), funding through the Internet. The first Internet fund was established by Intz.com for a wrestling comedy film called The Foul King in 1999. Internet funding was considered a good investment opportunity after the success of The Foul King. Internet funding has been popular since 1999. About 8.5 billion won (approximately $8.5 million) was invested in about 50 films through Internet funds as of 2003.
Internet funds are said to have contributed to the success of Korean films in the following ways. One way has been through the media attention given to Internet funds. Because the rate of return on Internet funds for successful films was over 100% for a short investment period (for example, Joint Security Area in 2000, My Sassy Girl in 2001, and Friend in 2001), the success of netizen investments as well as the success of Korean films garnered media attention.
Second, there is a direct marketing effect from the Internet funds. Netizens who are frequent users of the Internet discuss and share their concerns and emotions with each other. In this way, netizens advertise the films that they like. As a result, a rapid word-of-mouth effect seems to exist among netizens (Mayzlin 2005). Another marketing effect is through the media attention given to the quick closing of the funding process. In many cases, funding is on a firstcome-first-served basis. As a result, the process is closed as soon as the fund supply meets the fund demand. In some
34 These numbers are calculated based on the numbers of viewers in Seoul.

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

537

Table A.1 Selected Internet Funding: Year of Release, 2000­2003

Funding agent Production Netizen Internet funding Net rate

Title

Year of release company

costs

funding

ratio (%)

of return

The Foul King Die Bad Joint Security Area The Legend of Gingko Tears
Libera Me Jakarta Dream of Warrior My Sassy Girl Indian Summer
My Wife Is a Gangster My Boss, My Hero Guns & Talks Failan Friend
Kick the Moon Sorum One Fine Spring Day My Beautiful Girl, Mari 2009-Lost Memories
Resurrection of the Little Match Girl Over the Rainbow Oasis Conduct Zero Sex Is Zero
A Good Lawyer's Wife A Tale of Two Sisters Reversal of Fortune Wonderful Days Lost in the South Mission: Going Home Old Boy
Average

2000 2000 2000 2000 2000
2000 2000 2000 2001 2001
2001 2001 2001 2001 2001
2001 2001 2001 2001 2001
2002 2002 2002 2002 2002
2003 2003 2003 2003 2003 2003

Intz Fund Intz Fund Intz Fund Intz Fund Enterfund
Enterfund Enterfund Hans Global Goosdaq Goosdaq
Unitel Enterfund Enterfund Enterfund Enterfund
Daum Daum Daum Enterfund Enterfund
Enterfund Enterfund Enterfund Enterfund Enterfund
Myung Films Enterfund Enterfund Enterfund Enterfund Enterfund

120 000 13 000 300 000 450 000 35 000
450 000 170 000 270 000 220 000 300 000
270 000 300 000 300 000 270 000 350 000
320 000 210 000 320 000 400 000 900 000
1 100 000 350 000 320 000 430 000 400 000
285 000 410 000 398 000 1 000 000 450 000 460 000

10 000 560
10 000 10 000 4 000
10 400 10 000 33 000 10 000 10 000
20 000 70 000 15 000 25 000 10 000
15 000 25 000 15 000 10 612 10 000
10 000 11 045 15 859 9 033 13 000
200 000 25 000 13 362 30 000 30 000 20 000

8 33 4 31 3 33 2 22 11 43
2 31 5 88 12 22 4 55 3 33
7 41 23 33 5 00 9 26 2 86
4 69 11 90 4 69 2 65
1 11
0 91 3 16 4 96 2 10 3 25
70 18 6 10 3 36 3 00 6 67 4 35
77

1 75 03 3 66 -0 11 -0 85
-0 24 -0 11 -0 96
2 58 -0 09
3 95 1 93 0 82 -0 42 3 36
1 03 -0 74
0 08 -0 88 -0 14
-0 96 -0 31
1 04 0 67 2 27
0 89 0 63 -0 47 -0 33 -0 53 2 05

Sources. Various Internet funding agent companies. Notes. Unit: 10,000 won for the production cost and Internet fund (W1,000 = $1, roughly). Some films are not listed because of insufficient data. We list only the Internet funding for production of Korean films. There are also cases of Internet funds for marketing and distribution of films and for musicals and music albums.

cases, the funding process is closed in less than one minute (for example, it took only 10 seconds or fewer for Guns & Talks in 2001 and Kick the Moon in 2001). The quick closing received much attention from the media because it reflected the popularity of Korean films.
Another interesting fact on Internet funding is that the funding size is small relative to the total production costs (see Table A.1). On average, the Internet fund proportion is less than 10% of total production costs. One exception is A Good Lawyer's Wife (2003). The Internet fund proportion of this film is greater than 70% (Korea Film 2003).35 The same producer also succeeded in raising 100% of Internet funding for a film, Hello Brother, in 2004 (not shown in Table A.1). Following Korea, Japan also launched its first Internet funding for a film, Shinobi, in 2004 (Film 2.0 2005).
35 There is also another exception for the Internet funding of A Good Lawyer's Wife. Funding was made after the film was produced. This is compared with other films for which Internet funding was made before film production.

Appendix B. Technical Presentation for Results of the Text
[B.1] Proof that a higher share by the institutional investor is associated with a higher monitoring level and a higher profit of the film in §3:
Let us denote m a for m that satisfies the second FOC of (2), given a, in the institutional investor's problem. Let F a  k + ak . Note that F 0 = k 0  1, F 1 = k 1 + k 1 , and F a = 2k a + ak a  0. F a is decreasing in a. Therefore, to satisfy the first FOC of (2), the optimal a should be higher for higher E V . For the second FOC of (2), note that r m decreases in m. For a high value of ak, r should be low, implying that m should be high for the second FOC to hold. Because d ak /da = F a , we know that the sign of d ak /da is positive for low a, but is not clear for high a. However, the following lemma shows that we can restrict our attention to the area of positive d ak /da.
Lemma B1. Define a0 by d ak /da a=a0= 0. For any m and a+  a0, there exists a- < a0 s t U a- m > U a+ m .

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

538

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

Figure B.1 U

Nonoptimality of a > a0

U (a­, m) U (a+, m)

U(a, m) = akE(V ) ­ aC ­ m

a­

a0

a+

a

Note. U a m is evaluated given m.

Proof. Because ak is increasing for a < a0 and decreasing for a > a0, there is a- < a0 s.t. a-k a-  a+k a+ for a+ > a0. Thus, U a- m = a- k a- E V - C - m > a+ k a+ E V - C - m = U a+ m . Last, at a = a0, a marginal decrease of a will not change ak, while decreasing investment costs by C, which increases utility.
Lemma B1 is depicted in Figure B.1. Lemma B1 allows us to focus on the area where ak is increasing in a. In this area, an increase of a will increase m, which is an intuitive result. Note that a0 can be smaller or larger than one. Now we can show that (a m) become higher for films with higher profits.
Lemma B2 (Comparative Statics). Let us define s, a positive constant, as a scale parameter.
(i) Consider the scaled V , sV . Then, a and m are higher for higher s, ceteris paribus.
(ii) Consider the scaled C, sC. Then, a and m are higher for lower s, ceteris paribus.
(iii) Suppose VGH - VGL > VBH - VBL. Consider the scaled p, sp. Then, a and m are higher for higher s, ceteris paribus.
(iv) Consider the scaled monitoring efficiency, r , sr . Then, a and m are higher for higher s, ceteris paribus.
Proof. (i) FOCs with s become

Ua = 0

k + ak sE V - C = 0

Um = 0

akr sW - 1 = 0

For a higher s, sEV is higher. Thus, FOCs imply k + ak and akr should be lower, which are followed by higher a and m.
(ii) FOCs with s become

Ua = 0

k + ak E V - sC = 0

Um = 0

akr W - 1 = 0

For lower s, k + ak E V should be lower and akr
should be the same, which are followed by higher a and m.
(iii) Higher p implies higher E V and W . From FOCs, k + ak and r should decrease, which results from higher a and m.
(iv) From FOCs, higher r requires higher m given a,
which results in higher E V . Higher E V , in turn, requires

lower k + ak , or higher a. Note that higher a will require even higher m.36
[B.2] Proof of Proposition 1.
(i) See the text. (ii) When k a is constant, the FOC for a of (2) becomes kE V - C = 0. Because this FOC does not depend on a, the decision rule is that a = 0 if kE V - C < 0; a = 1 if kE V - C > 0, for given m. Therefore, the optimal decision rule is either (a = 1 m = m 1 ) if kE V - C - m > 0, or (a = 0 m = 0), otherwise. Because a = 0 indicates that kE V - C < 0, netizen investors will have no incentives to invest in the film. Although a = 1 indicates that kE V - C > 0, netizen investors cannot invest because there is no additional fund needed. (iii) Suppose that k a has a jump at aJ . For technical purposes, we assume that a (negative) jump occurs at a+J ; k aJ > k a+J , so that k a is a step function with the left continuity. In this case, it is easy to see that the optimal share will be 0, 1, or aJ , because the same logic as (ii) applies for each interval of 0 aJ and aJ 1 . When there are multiple jumps, the repeated application of the same logic shows that the optimal share will be one of 0, 1 and jump points. [B.3] Proof that a higher share by the institutional investor indicates a higher monitoring level and a higher profit of the film in the exogenous revenue-sharing model in §4: First, note that d tk /da = t k + tk , and d t k + tk /da = t k + 2t k + tk = - + - + - < 0. Note also that, at a = 0, t k + tk = t 0 k 0 > 0. On the other hand, at t = 1, t k + tk = t 1 k 1 + k 1 can be positive or negative. Similar to the simple model in §3, we can restrict our attention to the area of positive d tk /da.
Lemma B3. Define a0 by d tk /da a=a0= 0. For any m and a+  a0, there exists a- < a0 s.t. U a- m > U a+ m .
Proof. Apply the same logic as Lemma B1. Thanks to Lemma B3, we will focus on the area in which tk is increasing in a. A higher a induces a higher m. The following corollary shows comparative statics results are similar to Lemma B2.
Lemma B4 (Comparative Statics). Let us define s, a positive constant, as a scale parameter.
(i) Consider the scaled V , sV . Then, a and m are higher for higher s, ceteris paribus.
(ii) Consider the scaled C, sC. Then, a and m are higher for lower s, ceteris paribus.
(iii) Suppose VGH - VGL > VBH - VBL. Consider the scaled p, sp. Then, a and m are higher for higher s, ceteris paribus.
(iv) Consider the scaled monitoring efficiency, r sr . Then, a and m are higher for higher s, ceteris paribus.
Proof. Apply the same logic as Lemma B2.
[B.4] Proof of Lemma 1.
(i) Obvious because (6) does not imply (5). (ii) Obvious, because a = 0 implies kE V - C < 0. (iii) For a near 1, t a  a and m > 0. Note that institutional investor invests iff tkE V - aC  m. Because, for
36 These arguments can be formally proved by the usual total differentiation technique.

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

539

a near 1, tkE V - aC - m  a kE V - C - m, we have a kE V - C > 0. Therefore, 1 - t kE V - 1 - a C  1 - a · kEV - C > 0, so that netizen investors are willing to invest.
[B.5] Proof of Proposition 2.
(i) Obvious. (ii) Suppose that a satisfies (6). First, note that a < 1, because a = 1 would satisfy (5). It is also easy to see that ap < 1, because (6) implies (5) at a  1 from Lemma 1(iii), and that the profit is higher at a = 1 - than at a = 1, because profit is decreasing where a > a. Now, because a is the unique optimal solution to problem (3), the institutional investor's profit becomes lower as the distance between a and a is larger. Thus, the institutional investor will select a, as close to a as possible, while making the netizen investor's profit nonnegative. Therefore, such a will be obtained when the netizen investor's profit hits zero from negative. Then, the institutional investor's profit becomes tkE V - aC - m = kE V - C - 1 - t kE V - 1 - a C - m = kE V - C - m. If this profit is positive, then a is in equilibrium (ap = a). If not, ap = 0 is in equilibrium. It is obvious that Internet funding is not possible when ap = 0. (iii) Obvious.
[B.6] Proof of Proposition 3.
(i) Obvious. (ii) With k a = 0, the first-order condition for the institutional investor becomes La = Cr W /EV > 0. Thus, aep = 1 is optimal once the institutional investor invests. Because the institutional investor invests in the film as long as it is profitable, aep = 0 indicates a negative profit. (iii) This result follows from the repeated application of the same logic as (ii) to each constant interval (see also Proposition 1).
References
Akerlof, G. A. 1970. The market for "lemons": Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. Quart. J. Econom. 84(3) 488­500.
Anderson, E. T., D. I. Simester. 1998. The role of sale signs. Marketing Sci. 17(2) 139­155.
Anderson, E. W., C. Fornell, S. K. Mazvancheryl. 2004. Customer satisfaction and shareholder value. J. Marketing 68(4) 172­185.
Bayus, B. L. 1985. Word of mouth: The indirect effect of marketing efforts. J. Advertising Res. 25(3) 31­39.
Bolton, R. N. 2004. Linking marketing to financial performance and firm value. J. Marketing 68(4) 73­75.
Brander, J. A., T. R. Lewis. 1986. Oligopoly and financial structure: The limited liability effect. Amer. Econom. Rev. 76(5) 956­970.
Brealey, R. A., S. C. Myers, F. Allen. 2006. Corporate Finance, 8th ed. McGraw-Hill, Boston.
Buchanan, M. 2002. Nexus Small Worlds and the Groundbreaking Science of Networks. Norton & Company, New York.
Dellarocas, C., R. A. Narayan. 2006. A statistical measure of a population's propensity to engage in post-purchase online wordof-mouth. Statist. Sci. 21(2) 277­285.
De Vany, A., W. D. Walls. 1999. Uncertainty in the movie industry: Does star power reduce the terror of the box office? J. Cultural Econom. 23(4) 285­318.
Dong-A Ilbo. 2001. Young Hwa Tooja Netizens "Nae Young Hwa Hongbo Man" Maeng Hwalyak [Film-investing netizens are acting as marketers]. (April 13), http://www.donga.com/fbin/ output?sfrm=2&n=200104130058.

Economic Review. 2005. Tooja Seong Gong Bigyeal [Strategy for successful investment]. Special review, Economic Review, No. 276 (August 30), http://www.ermedia.net/news/newsdetail.php? uid=5217&category=3.
Eliashberg, J., A. Elberse, M. A. A. M. Leenders. 2006. The motion picture industry: Critical issues in practice, current research, and new research directions. Marketing Sci. 25(6) 638­661.
Faber, R. J., T. C. O'Guinn. 1984. Effect of media advertising and other sources on movie selection. Journalism Quart. 61(2) 371­377.
Film 2.0. 2005. "Nakama Yukie Effect," Young Hwa Fund Chuk Chuk ["Nakama Yukie Effect," film funding rolls along]. http://www.film2.co.kr/news/news_final.asp?mkey=145401.
Fornell, C., S. Mithas, F. V. Morgeson III, M. S. Krishnan. 2006. Customer satisfaction and stock prices: High returns, low risk. J. Marketing 70(1) 3­14.
Grossman, S. J., O. D. Hart. 1980. Takeover bids, the free-rider problem, and the theory of the corporation. Bell J. Econom. 11(1) 42­64.
Gruca, T. S., L. L. Rego. 2005. Customer satisfaction, cash flow, and shareholder value. J. Marketing 69(3) 115­130.
Holmström, B., P. Milgrom. 1987. Aggregation and linearity in the provision of intertemporal incentives. Econometrica 55(2) 303­328.
Jensen, M. C., W. H. Meckling. 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership structure. J. Financial Econom. 3 (4) 305­360.
Joseph, K., V. J. Richardson. 2002. Free cash flow, agency costs, and the affordability method of advertising budgeting. J. Marketing 66(1) 94­107.
Kim, R., S. H. Seog. 2006. Netizen funding in the film industry. Working paper, Korea Advanced Institute Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea.
Korea Film. 2003. Young Hwa "Baramnan Gajok" Internet Fund Mojip [Internet funding for film "A Good Lawyer's Wife"], http://koreafilm.co.kr/news/news2003_7-11_1.htm.
Korean Film Council. 2005. 2005 Nyun Hankook Younghwa Sanup Junkook Tonggye [Korean Film Industry Statistics of 2005].
Kreps, D. M. 1990. A Course in Microeconomic Theory, 1st ed. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Lenhart, A., J. Horrigan, D. Fallows. 2004. Content creation online. Report, Pew Internet & American Life Project. http://www. pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_Content_Creation_Report.pdf.
Liu, Y. 2006. Word of mouth for movies: Its dynamics and impact on box office revenue. J. Marketing 70(3) 74­89.
Mayzlin, D. 2005. Promotional chat on the Internet. Marketing Sci. 25(2) 155­163.
Modigliani, F., M. Miller. 1958. The cost of capital, corporation finance, and the theory of investment. Amer. Econom. Rev. 48(3) 261­297.
Myers, S. C., N. S. Majluf. 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have information that investors do not have. J. Financial Econom. 13(2) 187­221.
Narayanan, S., R. Desiraju, P. K. Chintagunta. 2004. Return on investment implications for pharmaceutical promotional expenditures: The role of marketing-mix interactions. J. Marketing 68(4) 90­105.
Neelamegham, R., P. Chintagunta. 1999. A Bayesian model to forecast new product performance in domestic and international markets. Marketing Sci. 18(2) 115­136.
Perold, A. F., G. Bhow. 2000. W. R. Hambrecht + Co.: OpenIPO. HBS Case 9-200-019, Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston.
Prag, J., J. Casavant. 1994. An empirical study of the determinants of revenues and marketing expenditures in the motion picture industry. J. Cultural Econom. 18(3) 217­235.
Ritter, J. R., I. Welch. 2002. A Review of IPO activity, pricing, and allocations. J. Finance 57(4) 1795­1828.

Seog and Hyun: Financing as a Marketing Strategy

540

Marketing Science 28(3), pp. 526­540, © 2009 INFORMS

Rogers, E. M. 1995. Diffusion of Innovations, 5th ed. Free Press, New York.
Rust, R. T., T. S. Chung. 2006. Marketing models of service and relationships. Marketing Sci. 25(6) 560­580.
Samjong KPMG Group. 2002. Younghwa, Munhwaeseo Sanupeuro [Film, from Culture to Industry], Samjong KPMG Group, Seoul, Korea.
Seog, S. H. 2006. The strategic role of insurance: The warranty case. J. Insurance Issues 29(1) 33­50.

Sochay, S. 1994. Predicting the performance of motion pictures. J. Media Econom. 7(4) 1­20.
Srivastava, R. K., T. A. Shervani, L. Fahey. 1998. Market-based assets and shareholder value: A framework for analysis. J. Marketing 62(1) 2­18.
Van den Bulte, C., Y. V. Joshi. 2007. New product diffusion with influentials and imitators. Marketing Sci. 26(3) 400­421.
Zingales, L. 2000. In search of new foundations. J. Finance 55(4) 1623­1653.

