http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/mksc

MARKETING SCIENCE
Vol. 39, No. 1, January­February 2020, pp. 253­280 ISSN 0732-2399 (print), ISSN 1526-548X (online)

Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Redistributive Effects on Consumer Welfare

Marco J. W. Kotschedoff,a Max J. Pachalib
a Department of Marketing, KU Leuven, B-2000 Antwerp, Belgium; b Department of Marketing, Tilburg University, 5000 LE Tilburg, Netherlands Contact: marco.kotschedoff@kuleuven.be, http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0029-5617 (MJWK); m.j.pachali@tilburguniversity.edu,
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2117-6043 (MJP)

Received: July 31, 2017 Revised: July 6, 2018; December 18, 2018 Accepted: December 25, 2018 Published Online in Articles in Advance: January 27, 2020
https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2019.1172
Copyright: © 2020 INFORMS

Abstract. This paper estimates an individual-level demand model for eggs differentiated by animal welfare. Typically, after minimum quality standards for eggs are raised, the price of higher-quality eggs falls. As a result, consumer welfare is redistributed from households that do not value animal welfare to households that are willing to pay a premium for animal welfare. In our analysis of German household data, we find that, on average, households with higher income are willing to pay more for eggs that provide higher animal welfare. This provides evidence that higher minimum quality standards have a regressive impact. In counterfactual scenarios, we estimate the cost reduction that would be needed to offset the regressive effect and find that as retailers' pricing power increases, the cost reduction must be higher. Finally, we consider hypothetical future scenarios that continue to increase the minimum quality standard until only the highest-quality eggs remain on the market.

History: Ginger Jin served as the senior editor and Andrew Ching served as associate editor for this article. This paper has been accepted for the Marketing Science Special Issue on Consumer Protection.
Supplemental Material: The online appendix is available at https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2019.1172.

Keywords: minimum quality standard · product differentiation · regulation · consumer harm · Bayesian estimation · heterogeneity

1. Introduction
Today, policy makers and regulators are taking an increasingly paternalistic stance with regard to consumer health and safety, as well as environmental and ethical standards. Many government agencies have introduced higher minimum quality standards and product bans on a variety of products for a wide range of reasons, from environmental protection1 and consumer health and safety2 to broader ethical standards, including animal welfare.3
Such regulations in the form of minimum quality standards and product bans are a ubiquitous aspect of our everyday lives, but not much is known about their economic impact. Although higher minimum quality standards are usually noncontroversial from an ethical or ecological viewpoint, they can have unintended consequences for consumers. In this paper, we make an empirical analysis of the impact of a higher minimum quality standard on individual consumer welfare, taking into account how firms adjust prices for the product variants that are still available following the new regulation. Our counterfactual experiments offer guidance to policy makers on the potentially regressive effects of such a higher standard, particularly on lower-income households, and how those effects can be mitigated.
Faced with a restricted set of products, buyers will adjust their individual consumption. But also firms,

notably retailers, will optimally adjust their pricing of the still available products and product variants. Understanding the mechanism of these adjustments is key, both to assessing the overall impact of any given policy and to correctly anticipating the effect of any planned policy. We conduct such an analysis for the case of a ban on the sale of battery eggs in Germany, where animal welfare is an important dimension of product quality. In the European Union (EU), fresh eggs are grouped into four categories (battery, barn, free-range, and organic) depending on different levels of hen welfare. The battery egg ban deprived German consumers of their lowest-quality, lowestprice alternative.
We argue in this paper that regulators should consider the possible equilibrium effects that raising minimum quality standards might have on individual consumer welfare. In equilibrium, one should expect a drop in prices for close substitutes. A firm that has some degree of pricing power will aim to attract buyers who formerly bought the lowest-quality product and decrease its margin for upper-quality products. In the end, former low-quality-product buyers are more negatively affected by the ban than high-quality-product buyers, because a higher minimum quality standard benefits consumers who buy upper quality products

253

254

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

anyway. Hence, there are losers and winners, but the impact on total consumer surplus is ambiguous.
The theoretical literature on minimum quality standards has not made clear-cut predictions about their effect on social welfare in the absence of strict assumptions about market structure, cost functions, and consumer preferences. Even if we focus exclusively on changes in aggregate consumer welfare, the theoretical literature has been ambiguous regarding the impact of minimum quality standards.4 Nor are we aware of any empirical study that explicitly addresses the effects of higher minimum quality standards on prices and consumer welfare in vertically differentiated product markets.
Technically, we use an empirical framework that is particularly well suited to analyzing heterogeneous consumer preferences in markets with vertical product differentiation. In our main analysis, we estimate a hierarchical Bayesian multinomial logit model with a flexible mixture of normals first-stage prior to allow for nonnormal consumer heterogeneity in the estimation. We rely on a modified version of the standard Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm in Rossi et al. (2005) that is described in Pachali et al. (2018) and implement order constraints for the egg-label intercepts to explicitly model vertical product differentiation in our demand framework.
The results show substantial heterogeneity in preferences for animal welfare­differentiated eggs across households. We demonstrate that prices for the majority of higher-quality eggs fall after the increase in the minimum quality standard, which means that consumer welfare is essentially redistributed from households that do not value animal welfare to households that are willing to pay a premium for animal welfare. As higher-income households are willing to pay, on average, more for eggs that provide better animal welfare, this provides evidence that higher minimum quality standards have a regressive impact on households. Our findings suggest that equilibrium price reactions on the supply side are a major driver for the regressive impact of higher minimum quality standards. In contrast to other regulatory questions, such as merger approvals by competition authorities, equilibrium price effects and the resulting (possibly asymmetric) changes in consumer welfare do not seem to be considered ex ante by policy makers in product regulation cases.
Using counterfactual experiments, we show how consumer protection agencies can estimate the reduction in costs of the new minimum quality standard that would be necessary to offset the regressive effect. This cost reduction can be either achieved by implementing a subsidy or by other factors that lower the marginal costs of production such as economics of scale.5 If the expected reduction in costs is close to the necessary level, the policy of increasing the minimum quality standard is less problematic in terms of

harming low-income households. Otherwise, a tailored subsidy scheme could be introduced to soften the regressive effect. We identify the role of retailers' pricing power as an essential determinant of the level of the cost reduction required to protect consumers who would otherwise be harmed by the higher minimum quality standard. Finally, we examine hypothetical future scenarios in which the minimum quality standard is increased until only organic eggs remain on the market. We find that the cost reduction would have to be greater if the policy maker were to further raise the minimum quality standard.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The related literature is discussed in Section 2. Section 3 provides details on the German egg market and describes the data used in the analysis. The empirical model and estimation techniques are introduced in Section 4. The demand estimation results are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 discusses redistributive effects of increased minimum quality standards, the role of retailers' pricing power, and policy implications. Finally, Section 7 draws conclusions from our findings.
2. Related Literature
As our analysis shows, any public policy intervention on a consumer product should take firms' optimal (price) responses and their impact on consumer welfare (at least in the long run) into account. In particular, policy makers should consider the possibility that even a simple intervention, such as banning one quality tier in a grocery product category, may have varied distributional consequences on households with different sociodemographic characteristics. Although our empirical analysis is very specific, as we study the ban of battery eggs in Germany, the economic mechanism that drives our results is very general and therefore relates to many streams of literature.
2.1. Structural Models of Demand and Supply Our work contributes to the literature on structural models that provide an ex ante evaluation of pressing policy questions discussed in the public debate. In a recent study, Dubois et al. (2018) evaluated the equilibrium effect of banning advertising in junk food markets on consumer welfare and firms' profits. Ryan (2012) analyzed higher environmental standards in the cement industry, showing how this can discourage entry and thereby reduce social welfare. We combine both an ex post evaluation of banning the lowest quality tier in the German egg market and an ex ante analysis of banning even higher quality tiers. Our paper therefore provides a structural framework for policy evaluations in vertically differentiated product markets to study equilibrium effects on prices and

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

255

the welfare impact on different consumer segments. Moreover, we also discuss how likely regressive effects of higher minimum quality standards can be mitigated through a tailored subsidy scheme.
2.2. Agricultural Economics Literature The agricultural economics literature has published many studies on animal welfare regulation in general and hen welfare regulation in particular. This stream of literature deals with estimating willingness to pay (WTP) for animal welfare and/or product sustainability in different categories; see, for instance, Allender and Richards (2010a) and Andersen (2011) in the context of eggs, Zander and Feucht (2018) for seafood, and Norwood and Lusk (2011) for pork meat and eggs. Identification of consumer's WTP for differentiated eggs is of central interest to our research question as well. We contribute to this stream of literature by showing that implementation of the vertical quality differentiation in our demand model is crucial for identifying households' WTP for animal welfare­ differentiated eggs. We isolate the vertical product differentiation of perceived animal welfare and treat the four hen welfare labels in the German egg market as quality attributes. This is also reasonable, as production costs increase when producers provide higher hen welfare, and most consumers regard the four categories as reflecting different quality tiers.
Battery eggs are not only banned in Europe, but also in several states in the United States. For the past decade, there has been a lively debate among U.S. academics on the impact of hen welfare regulations on consumer welfare and egg prices (e.g., Sumner et al. 2008; Norwood et al. 2009; Allender and Richards 2010a; Norwood 2011; Malone and Lusk 2016; Mullally and Lusk 2018a, b; Sumner 2018).
The closest study to ours is by Allender and Richards (2010a), who look into the impact of hen welfare regulation on consumers. Using a structural demand model for differentiated eggs, they examine the hypothetical impact on consumers of a cage-free egg production mandate in California. However, they can only make a distinction between regular cage eggs (approximately 95% market share) and cage-free eggs (5% market share) in their data on the Californian egg market. Likely, equilibrium price effects are not taken into account, as they do not model retailers' pricing decisions. Instead, the authors relate to Sumner et al. (2008) and assume that prices would rise by approximately 20% as a result of higher production costs after regulation. More recent studies provide ex post analyses of the Californian ban of cages for egg-laying hens in 2015. Malone and Lusk (2016) deliver an ex post estimate of egg price evolution after the regulation in California took effect. They find a statistically significant impact on egg prices in California, with prices

increasing by 33% to 70%. Mullally and Lusk (2018a) evaluate more data on the postban period to obtain an updated ex post estimate of the effect of the Californian caged hen ban on egg prices. They find a 22% increase in the average price paid per dozen eggs due to stricter hen housing restrictions.
Apart from structural differences between the Californian and German egg markets, our analysis is directly related to these studies. In our view, we contribute to this literature by explicitly modeling price evolutions of remaining quality tiers after banning lower-quality alternatives in a fully developed structural model including demand and supply.6 Unlike Malone and Lusk (2016) and Mullally and Lusk (2018a), we find that prices of remaining higher quality tiers typically fall after increasing minimum quality standards in the German egg market. The economic mechanism driving this result is very general and relates to the theoretical literature on minimum quality standards (see Section 2.3), to the literature on pharmaceutical markets and the so-called brand-name price puzzle, and to the literature on private-label entry in food and beverage industries (see Section 6.2 for a discussion of the link to the former two streams of literature). However, our results do not contradict the findings of the previous literature on the Californian caged hen ban because, as we show, price reactions after a ban depend simultaneously on multiple factors such as demand preferences, cost functions, and market structure. In this regard, we extend previous findings in our counterfactual simulations by further decomposing the drivers of the price reactions after imposing higher minimum quality standards. Nevertheless, the aggregation level of prices is also crucial for determining the price effect. If we had averaged egg prices across all animal welfare categories, we would observe an increase in egg prices as well, but only because of the composition effect as consumers purchase more higher-quality eggs. However, in terms of quality-adjusted prices, we show a drop in prices in the long run.7 Before making any statement on the impact of observed egg price evolution on consumer welfare, we argue that one has to account for the fact that these eggs are vertically differentiated, as many consumers have a greater willingness to pay for better animal welfare. Otherwise, we would treat eggs in grocery stores as homogeneous goods, which stands in conflict with the observed price premium some consumers pay for eggs they understand were laid by better-treated hens. At least for Germany, where there is sufficient demand for each hen welfare egg label, this would not be appropriate.
2.3. Minimum Quality Standards Literature Finally, retailers' optimal price response that we find in our model can be linked to the theoretical literature

256

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

on minimum quality standards. The ban of low quality tiers in a product category always increases the minimum quality standard. Significant theoretical contributions were made by Mussa and Rosen (1978), Leland (1979), Shapiro (1983), Besanko et al. (1987, 1988), Crampes and Hollander (1995), Panzar and Savage (2011), and Buehler and Schuett (2014). According to the theoretical literature, firms can extract more consumer surplus by using a product line with quality-differentiated goods to segment consumers with respect to their willingness to pay for quality. This is especially relevant if firms cannot directly price discriminate between consumers with different valuations of quality. Any policy that affects the product line of quality-differentiated goods, such as increasing the minimum quality standard, will trigger a price response by firms if they have some degree of pricing power. According to theoretical predictions, prices of remaining quality tiers that are close substitutes are expected to drop after the lowest-quality alternative is removed from the market because firms lose a tool to discriminate between different consumer segments. This provides a theoretical explanation for our observed pricing pattern in the German egg market. The theoretical implications of minimum quality standards are well understood in the agricultural economics literature as well. See, for instance, Bockstael (1984) or Lapan and Moschini (2007), which provide theoretical treatments and examples for minimum quality standards in food markets. In terms of consumer welfare, there are no clear-cut predictions of the effect of higher minimum quality standards if consumers have heterogeneous preferences for quality. Typically, some segments of consumers with higher quality valuation will benefit, and others with lower quality valuation will be harmed.
Our study contributes to all these literature streams by providing a framework as well as a full-fledged empirical analysis of the equilibrium effects on prices and different consumer segments in vertically differentiated product markets.
3. Market Details and Data
3.1. The Market for Fresh Hen Eggs
The German market for fresh eggs is suitable to study the effect of higher minimum quality standards on consumer welfare in markets with vertical product differentiation for two reasons: first, since 2004, there has been an EU-wide requirement to state the breeding category on egg packages and to print a code on each egg indicating origin and breeding category.8 Thus, consumers typically associate the four breeding categories with different quality levels: battery eggs  barn eggs  free-range eggs, and  organic eggs.
These perceived quality differences can be motivated by consumers seeking a "warm glow," who feel

that the animals serving them have better than average living conditions and/or who find that eggs from happier hens do indeed taste better. Table 1 depicts the differences in living conditions for hens between the different egg categories. Production costs are different across categories. The better hen welfare an egg category provides, the higher are the production costs. The fact that there is sufficient demand for each category suggests that consumers are heterogeneous in their WTP for different levels of animal welfare/ quality.
Second, in 1999, the EU decided that all member states had to ban the production of battery eggs by 2012. Germany already implemented the ban in 2010.9 Nevertheless, battery eggs could still be imported from other EU countries until 2012, and an updated version of this breeding category, called Kleingruppenhaltung, was introduced to replace battery eggs. This category was slightly better but still worse than barn eggs in terms of animal welfare. The German retail sector, however, decided to completely delist battery eggs from its assortment of fresh eggs in the course of 2010 and to not introduce the eggs from Kleingruppenhaltung. Some retailers preempted this delisting and already cut battery eggs out of their inventory several months before the official deadline. For example, Lidl, a large retailer in Germany, stopped selling battery eggs already in 2009.10 As a consequence, since mid-2010, German households have consumed battery eggs only indirectly as an ingredient of processed food products such as noodles, pastries, and mayonnaise.
3.2. Data Our analysis is based on Nielsen Homescan data, which track expenditures of German households on fast-moving consumer goods.11 All participants are surveyed once a year, and several demographic variables such as age, household size, and income are recorded. For each year from 2008 to 2012, the

Table 1. Main Differences Between Egg Breeding Categories

Outdoor
Surface per area per Egg label Hens per m2 hen in cm2 hen in m2 Additional points

Organic

6

Free-range

9

Barn

9

Battery

18

1,667
1,100 1,100
550

4

Organic feed, no

beak trimming,

no regular use

of antibiotics

4

Live in open

barns

0

Live in open

barns

0

Live in cages

Source. http://www.deutsche-eier.info/die-henne/haltungsformen/ (accessed March 2, 2016).

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

257

Nielsen Company (Germany) GmbH drew a representative sample of German households. Households of the representative sample have projection factors (which may vary from year to year) to allow for extrapolation of sales and markets shares in Germany.
We focus on purchases of eggs in the German retail sector, specifically those discounters and full-range supermarkets that sell around 80% of all fresh eggs in Germany.12 Only purchases at the top 10 retail chains were considered,13 because infrequent shopping trips to smaller chains make it difficult to impute prices for nonchosen alternatives and to cross-validate data. These sales represent approximately 75% of all egg purchases made in the German retail sector. For estimating our demand model, a product is defined as an egg category­package size combination offered at one of the 10 retail chains.14 Similarly to Dubé et al. (2010), we define an aggregate of purchase incidents in related product categories as an outside option.15 As we analyze only fresh hens' eggs, we define boiled and painted eggs as well as eggs from other types of poultry, for example, quails and gooses, as outside goods. A similar approach of defining the outside option for estimating the demand of differentiated eggs can be found in Allender and Richards (2010a), where an aggregate of fringe brands is used as an outside good. Section A.1 in the online appendix describes how we impute prices for nonchosen egg alternatives.
3.3. Market Shares, Prices, and Model-Free Evidence
Figure 1 illustrates the seasonal patterns in egg purchases of inside goods (i.e., the sum of all battery, barn, free-range, and organic egg purchases) as well as the outside good. The left panel depicts monthly extrapolated sales, and the right panel shows share of inside goods on total market size. We observe high

peaks for inside good egg sales at end of the year (Christmas) and smaller peaks in the Easter period. The outside good, however, exhibits strong increases during Easter (as illustrated by the vertical dashed lines), which causes the market share of inside goods to decrease.
Figure 2 shows market share and price evolutions for different egg categories over time.16 Market shares are shown in the left panel and prices in the right panel. As with the seasonal patterns in Figure 1, we observe that the outside good gains market share during Easter.
The price series points to the vertical product differentiation in the egg market. In the year 2008, where all egg categories were still available, we observe higher average prices as we move up from battery to organic eggs. From 2009 to the first months of 2010, prices of battery eggs increase until they almost match the prices of barn eggs. During 2009, we see that battery eggs became scarce as more and more battery egg henhouses were reformed into barn egg houses, which explains the increase in battery egg prices observed in the figure. At the same time, some retail chains started to ban battery eggs from their shelves as well. As a consequence, more consumers switched to barn eggs as battery egg prices converged to prices of barn eggs. Finally, by the end of 2010, market shares of battery eggs were fully absorbed by barn eggs. In contrast, free-range and organic eggs could not substantially expand market shares after the ban.
Regarding price patterns observed in Figure 2, barn, free-range, and organic eggs seemed relatively stable (with the exception of organic egg prices in 2008), and we did not observe firms adjusting prices over the season. Only prices of the outside good exhibited a market response in form of lower average prices during Easter. The observed market share and price patterns motivate the specification of our demand model in Section 4.

Figure 1. (Color online) Seasonal Pattern of Egg Purchases

Note. The dashed lines indicate Easter in every year.

258

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

Figure 2. (Color online) Monthly Market Shares and (Sales-Weighted) Average Prices Across Egg Categories

Note. The dashed lines indicate Easter in every year.

In 2012, there was a drop in prices for barn and freerange eggs. This pattern could have two causes: First, there might have been a change in demand preferences. For instance, consumers might have had different valuations for egg categories after the ban of battery eggs and retail chains reacted to this demand shock. In the demand specification in our model, we control for that source by allowing consumers to have different egg preferences before and after the ban of battery eggs. Second, the regulatory intervention might have triggered retailers' price responses even if consumers' valuation for hen welfare­differentiated eggs had not changed. As the theoretical literature on minimum quality standards discussed in Section 2 concluded, firms can extract more consumer surplus by using a product line with quality-differentiated goods and segmenting consumers based on their willingness to pay for that quality. Banning the lowest-quality-alternative battery eggs might therefore trigger a price response by retailers if they have some degree of pricing power. Whereas retailers used battery eggs to compete for price-sensitive consumers before the ban, the role fell to barn eggs after the policy shift because they became the lowest quality tier. Accordingly, prices for the remaining quality tiers are expected to drop, as firms lost one rung on their quality ladder. In Section 6, we isolate price effects of higher minimum quality standards in a structural model framework to verify and illustrate these hypotheses.
The price reactions illustrated in Figure 2 suggest that--assuming consumer preferences for different egg categories remain unchanged--typical battery egg consumers are likely harmed, whereas typical barn and free-range egg consumers likely benefit, from the ban on selling battery eggs. Over all, households with lower income are more price sensitive and tend to prefer battery eggs as the cheapest alternative. Figure 3 illustrates this conjecture by comparing

evolutions of market shares for different egg labels across different income groups in our sample of households.17
Table 2 shows the percentiles for the net income per adult in household, which we use to form 10 income groups.
According to Figure 3, we observe that in 2008, the market share of battery eggs decreased as we moved up from the lowest-income group (Group 1) to the highest (Group 10). At the time, the lowest-income group had virtually no demand for organic eggs. In 2012, after the ban of battery eggs, barn eggs constituted around 70% of egg purchases by the lowest-income group but less than 50% in the highest-income group. We regard this as model-free evidence that the ban on battery eggs is regressive and particularly disadvantages households in lower-income groups--a result that we further examine in the counterfactual analysis in Section 6.
3.4. Estimation Sample In order to meaningfully estimate individual preferences, we have to ensure that each household had at least one chance to choose from among all egg categories, for example, battery, barn, free-range, and organic egg. However, the set of representative households in the Nielsen Homescan data are not exactly identical over the years, and a fraction of households are replaced each year by similar ones for a number of reasons, such as sample attrition or irregular recording patterns. For instance, if we observe barn egg purchases of households that got into the sample only after the ban of battery eggs, we cannot know with any certainty whether these households would have bought battery eggs instead of barn eggs if still available. For our estimation, we therefore consider only households that belong to the representative sample of 2008.18 We further restrict our estimation sample and

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

259

Figure 3. (Color online) Yearly Market Shares for Egg Labels by Income Groups

include only households that purchased eggs at least four times between 2008 and 2012, in line with a common practice in the demand estimation literature using household scanner data (e.g., Erdem et al. 2008,

Dubé et al. 2010). This leaves us with a total of 6,961 households for our estimation sample. We can match these households with their projection factors and demographics recorded in 2008, allowing for market

260

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

Table 2. Percentiles for Monthly Income per Adult in Household 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%
Monthly income Income per adult in EUR 632 786 925 1,052 1,184 1,337 1,500 1,744 2,190

simulations based on 2008 prices, as we perform in Section 6. Table 3 compares our estimation sample with the full representative sample in 2008. We conclude that in terms of observable demographics, the estimation sample seems comparable to the full sample.
Table 4 displays market-share-weighted average prices for a package of 10 eggs and market shares for different egg categories based on the estimation sample. We regard the prices in 2012 as long-run new equilibrium prices after the ban on battery eggs. Basically, Table 4 is equivalent to Figure 2 with the difference that it depicts prices and market shares on a yearly basis. In 2008, when battery eggs were still listed by German retail chains, both barn and battery eggs exhibited similar market shares and together constituted around 65% of all egg purchases. The difference between average prices for 10 eggs of both breeding categories was EUR 0.34 in 2008. Comparing average prices for a package of 10 barn eggs between 2008 and 2012, we observe that they are EUR 0.16 lower in 2012, when battery eggs are no longer offered by retailers. In 2012, barn eggs account for around 60% of all egg purchases in our sample. By 2012, the price for free-range eggs has also dropped. As already

explained above, the observed price patterns fit our
theoretical predictions on the impact of increasing
minimum quality standards. However, we want to point out that these changes
in average prices and market shares alone should not be used to quantify the effect of banning battery eggs on prices and consumer welfare. Although we think that most of the price decrease for barn and free-range eggs is due to the ban, we cannot rule out the possibility that other factors have simultaneously changed such as egg tier preferences or cost functions. However, as our aim is to isolate the impact of a higher minimum quality standard, in terms of banning battery eggs, on consumer welfare, we employ a structural demand model to estimate consumer preferences for different egg categories and control for seasonal effects and changes in preferences after the policy shift. For our structural model, we estimate individual demand parameters based on 380,790 purchase incidents of 6,961 households between 2008 and 2012. Furthermore, given these demand estimates, we characterize long-term equilibrium effects in Section 6 and study optimal pricing reactions due to the banning of a lower quality tier using a supply model of retail competition.

Table 3. Description of Household Sample and Characteristics

2008

Variables

Mean

Standard dev.

Median

Min

Max

Full sample of households

Household size Monthly net income in EUR Pet in household Children in household Age oldest household member Female share in household Urban dummy No. of households

2.28 2,328.98
0.45 0.25 53.56 0.50 0.75

1.16 1,329.69
0.50 0.43 14.48 0.29 0.44

2.00 2,058.00
0.00 0.00 53.00 0.50 1.00 10,843

1.00 500.00
0.00 0.00 19.00 0.00 0.00

9.00 7,996.00
1.00 1.00 99.00 1.00 1.00

Estimation sample of households

Household size Monthly net income in EUR Pet in household Children in household Age oldest household member Female share in household Urban dummy No. of households

2.38 2,350.71
0.48 0.28 52.21 0.50 0.75

1.18 1,313.33
0.50 0.45 14.09 0.27 0.43

2.00 2,096.00
0.00 0.00 51.00 0.50 1.00 6,961

1.00 500.00
0.00 0.00 19.00 0.00 0.00

9.00 7,996.00
1.00 1.00 99.00 1.00 1.00

Note. The urban dummy equals one if the household lives in a municipality with at least 50,000 inhabitants. dev., Deviation.

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

261

Table 4. Data Description of Estimation Sample

Average price (EUR) per 10 eggs

Egg product 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Organic

2.57 2.68 2.68 2.69 2.69

Free-range

1.60 1.71 1.72 1.75 1.56

Barn

1.29 1.33 1.32 1.32 1.13

Battery

0.95 1.08 1.21

Outside good 1.67 1.81 1.92 1.73 1.72

No. of households

No. of purchase incidents

2008
5.10 21.80 30.54 34.78 7.79 6,961 87,449

Market share (%)

2009 2010 2011

6.09 18.79 41.30 25.78 8.04 6,600 86,513

6.32 20.01 63.50 0.96 9.21 6,045 77,412

8.25 19.71 61.29
10.75 5,553 66,061

2012
8.03 21.15 60.16
10.65 5,224 63,355

4. Empirical Framework
4.1. Demand Specification
In our demand framework, we assume that a household makes a discrete choice among Jt egg products during each egg purchase occasion at time t (as in Allender and Richards 2010a, b; Andersen 2011). We define the household's choice opportunity to be conditional on a purchase incident in the egg category, and we do not model consumer choice of every trip to a retailer, which would include trips of no purchases in the egg category at all.19
As is usually the case with empirical demand estimation, we do not know the specific set of egg alternatives across retailers that a household might consider at the time of purchase. However, the structure of the data allows us to infer individual preferences for the 10 retail chains (conditional on observing an egg purchase) that effectively locate the alternatives most likely to be considered and offer valuable information about the level of differentiation across retailers required for the counterfactual analysis below. Accordingly, we assume consumers have full information and include the egg alternatives of all 10 retail chains into the individual consideration set. Household i's indirect utility from egg product g in chain l at period t is specified as

Uiglt



i,g1{t regular} + ~ i,g1{t + ¯~ i,g1{t Christmas}+ + ipglt + i1{unitsg 6}

Easter}
+ i,l + iglt if g

Battery,



i,g1{t regular, t < RC} + Ri,gC1{t regular, t  RC}+ + ~ i,g1{t Easter} + ¯~ i,g1{t Christmas}+
+ ipglt + i1{unitsg 6} + i,l + iglt
otherwise,

(1)

where g  {Battery, Barn, Free-range, Organic} and l  {1, . . . , 10} in our application. The indicator variable, 1{unitsg 6}, denotes whether egg label g has the package size six instead of 10 eggs. The price is given by pglt, and we normalize the mean utility of the outside option to zero, ui0t 0. We set j : (g,l) to simplify notation in

what follows and replace the deterministic part of utility by Vijt for household i and every choice alternative j at time t. Assuming that ijt follows a type I extreme value distribution, individual choice probabilities are given by a multinomial logit model:

{ Prit

jp}

1

+

eVijt Jt
k1

eVikt

.

(2)

We have 26 parameters to estimate on the household level, denoted by20
( i i, i,Battery, . . . , i,Organic, ~ i,Battery, . . . ,

~ i,Organic, ¯~ i,Battery, . . . , ¯~ i,Organic,

)

(3)

Ri,BCarn, . . . , Ri,OCrganic, i, ^ i,2, . . . , ^ i,10 .

4.2. Endogeneity of Prices
As with most demand estimation problems, there are endogeneity concerns regarding the price variable. Our demand specification in Equation (1) therefore incorporates egg-label-specific seasonality control dummies for the Easter and Christmas periods,21 as well as regime change dummies.22 The latter measure preferences for the remaining quality tiers after the ban on battery eggs. We include these controls to capture possible changes in egg preferences that may potentially lead firms to change their prices. A common endogeneity concern is that supply-side reactions (such as price changes) on demand shocks unobserved by the econometrician may bias the price parameter estimate in Equation (1).
For instance, according to Figure 2, we observe that the outside good gains market share during the Easter season, whereas barn and free-range eggs lose shares at the same time. Even though this observation goes along with a drop in prices of the outside good, we cannot rule out that households have different preferences for the inside goods (relative to the outside good) in the Easter period--especially because the outside good incorporates painted eggs. Similarly, although retail prices appear to be relatively stable at the end of the year, Figure 1 indicates high peaks for sales of the inside goods during the Christmas season.

262

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

We therefore include Christmas seasonality dummies to control for this pattern. Finally, policy regulations, such as the ban on battery eggs that we study, can affect public sentiment regarding animal welfare that might influence preferences of households. We include regime change dummies because we cannot rule out such preference changes according to Figure 2. The observation that market shares of organic eggs remained stable after the increase in relative prices of organic eggs at the end of year 2011 might be due to a preference shift of households toward organic eggs following the policy regulation or due to a more general shift toward consuming more sustainable egg products. Figure 2 also indicates that the policy shift is probably the most important factor to identify price sensitivity. Battery egg average prices almost converged with barn egg prices until 2010, most likely because they became scarce as more egg suppliers upgraded their farms to barn egg production.23 Most of the price variation is across egg labels. We control for that dimension through egg-label intercepts. Another dimension of price variation is across retail chains, for example, low-price discounters versus high-price, fullrange supermarkets. We control for that dimension by including individual retail chain preference parameters that affect the likelihood of purchasing a certain egg label at a particular retailer.
Another possible approach to compensate would be to apply instrumental variable techniques. Cost shifters are natural candidates for instruments, as they usually correlate with prices but do not directly influence demand. We have access to potential cost shifters in the form of monthly hen fodder prices as well as wholesale prices of battery, barn, and freerange eggs from the agricultural commodities exchange in Germany.24 Section A.2 in the online appendix tests the strength of these potential instruments. We find that the short-term variation in potential cost shifters is not directly transmitted to retail egg prices (see results shown in Table A.1 in the online appendix) and conclude that we do not have good instruments available.
Finally, although there is never a guarantee to control for all possible factors that correlate with prices and also directly influence demand, doing so would not qualitatively change our findings in Section 6. As there is no individual pricing to consumers by retail chains, we should rather expect that a likely attenuation bias shifts the whole distribution of price coefficients toward zero. Thus, it should not change the ordering of price parameters across households. Second, if the price parameter distribution were biased toward zero, the calculated changes in consumer surplus would be rather underestimated in absolute terms. In that case, our findings of the redistributive effects across different consumer segments can be regarded as conservative estimates or lower bounds.

4.3. Estimation Approach and Prior Constraints As outlined in Section 3, we observe sufficient demand in each egg-label category to make it particularly important to rely on a model that explicitly accounts for preference heterogeneity. We rely on a hierarchical Bayesian multinomial logit model with a mixture of normals first-stage prior to estimate individual demand parameters i. This approach not only allows approximate deviations from standard normal heterogeneity distributions as described in Rossi et al. (2005), but is also well suited for the purpose of estimating reliable individual-level coefficients when the amount of data provided by each panel unit is rather small. Table 5 shows the varying amount of information provided by each household in the sample.
A hierarchical Bayesian approach that effectively pools information across households through the prior and thereby shrinks extreme coefficient estimates (implied by a short history of observations on the individual level) toward the sample mean is usually considered more reliable. We believe that this is a desirable property in our application as, given the dimensionality of our model, we have only a rather short history of purchases for the majority of households in the sample. Moreover, the relatively small amount of within-quality-tier price variation compared with price variation across quality tiers further motivates the use of a hierarchical model.
It is well understood in the literature that standard unconstrained hierarchical prior distributions often lack economic rationality (e.g., Reiss and Wolak 2007, Allenby et al. 2014, Pachali et al. 2018). As a consequence, market simulations based on the posterior of the hierarchical prior can be misleading and produce counterfactual outcomes that lack face validity. In most applications, the reason is that individual-level posterior distributions will reflect large amounts of posterior uncertainty about a specific household's preferences because of the limited amount of individual information usually available. We therefore need to distinguish uncertainty in posterior inference from irrational behavior, and the specification of the hierarchical prior becomes important.
We want our model to provide estimates of {i} in line with basic economic theory. This application represents the common situation with a mix of constrained

Table 5. Distribution of the Number of Egg Purchase Incidents Across N 6, 961 Individuals in the Estimation Sample

Min 1st qu. Median Mean 3rd qu. Max

Purchases 4

21

43

55

77

338

Note. qu., Quartile.

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

263

and unconstrained coefficients in a hierarchical model.

Whereas we should not constrain preferences for the

retail chains and the battery egg taste coefficients, which

measures preferences for battery eggs over the outside

good, it seems meaningful and actually important to

constrain the remaining parameters.

For example, a household that is observed to purchase

only the highest-price alternative (organic eggs)

could be rationalized as exhibiting positive prefer-

ences for high prices in a model without economi-

cally motivated constraints. We therefore constrain

the price coefficient to be negative for every household.25 Similarly, an unconstrained model could mis-

leadingly rationalize the choice pattern of a house-

hold that only purchased the lowest-price alternative

(battery eggs) based on higher (direct utility) pref-

erences for battery eggs than for qualitatively superior alternatives.26 However, everything else equal, a

household should not be worse off consuming an

organic egg instead of a battery egg if purchased at the

same price. Preferences for the four different egg

labels should therefore satisfy the ordering implied

by the perceived quality differences.

Finally, households should not be worse off if they

choose 10 instead of six eggs, everything else being

equal, and we restrict the package size six coefficients

to be negative.

Table 6 summarizes the constraints we impose.

Throughout the study, we measure each household's

individual WTP for a package of 10 eggs from the

respective category in comparison with a package of

10 battery eggs (in the regular season before regime

change) as

WTPi,g

i,g - i,Battery -i

for

(4)

g Barn, Free-range, Organic.

Without the sign and order constraints, we obtain some households with a lower WTP for organic eggs than for battery eggs, a problem that has already occurred in the literature. For instance, Andersen (2011) separates the two factors that increase a household's WTP for different egg product labels: animal welfare and product safety. The author's result, however, is a negative mean WTP for nonbattery eggs compared with battery eggs, and mean WTP becomes smaller moving from barn to free-range to organic eggs (see Andersen 2011, table 2a, p. 574). This contradicts economic reasoning regarding vertical product differentiation and common market knowledge. More generally, valuations of vertically differentiated product features are difficult to estimate on a household level if only observational data are available with limited variation in prices. In our case, the everyday low pricing strategy by German retailers for eggs (see Figure 2) does not provide sufficient variation to

Table 6. Restricted Attributes and Constraints Imposed on Levels

Restricted attributes

Constraints

Price Egg labels (regular) Egg labels (Easter) Egg labels (Christmas) Egg labels (regime change) Package size

i  0 i,Battery  i,Barn  i,Free-range  i,Organic
~ i,Battery  ~ i,Barn  ~ i,Free-range  ~ i,Organic ¯~ i,Battery  ¯~ i,Barn  ¯~ i,Free-range  ¯~ i,Organic i,Battery  Ri,BCarn  Ri,FCree-range  Ri,OCrganic i  0

disentangle households' price sensitivity and preferences for quality tiers without the sign and order constraints. The rationality assumption we employ ensures that we interpret households mostly purchasing low quality tiers or small packages as being price sensitive instead of having higher valuations for poor quality tiers or small package sizes.27 For ease of comparability, we characterize differences of posterior inferences between the constrained and unconstrained model in Section A.4 in the online appendix. Even though we believe the constraints are valid for the vast majority of consumers, they might still not hold for every household in the sample. For instance, households that face particular storage constraints of eggs might not be worse off by choosing the smaller package size, everything else equal. Our demand framework does not incorporate such behavior, and we assume that households that buy the 10 eggs and face storage constraints could get rid of the four additional eggs without losses in utility--which is probably not the case for all households. This could slightly bias egg-label estimates (because not all egg labels were offered at smaller package sizes) or the price coefficient when households do not purchase small package sizes because of lower prices. Similarly, the vertical differences between egg labels might also not hold for all households because of a lack of economic rationality in choice patterns caused by, for example, social costs, such as buying organic seeming as though one is uppity compared with the social reference group. As a consequence, we would overestimate price sensitivity when the order constraints were in fact violated for such households. However, the error term in the utility specification still allows deviations from rationality to occur, although it cannot be explained by the deterministic part of the indirect utility.
The Bayesian implementation of our demand model follows the approach in Pachali et al. (2018). They propose an MCMC algorithm similar to that in Rossi et al. (2005) that effectively samples from the posterior distribution of a model imposing sign and/or order constraints on some coefficients. The basic idea is that unconstrained coefficients have a standard normal prior, whereas sign and order constraints are imposed

264

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

through a log-normal distribution. MCMC inference

is performed on a transformed space exploiting the

property that coefficients are jointly normally dis-

tributed after the transformation.

We specify our constraints on i by defining the func-

tional form g : Rk  Rkc mapping conditionally normally distributed variates i to sign and order constrained

coefficients i that enter the likelihood, where k denotes

the number of coefficients in i. The hierarchical prior

is specified as follows in this application:

i

 

i i,Battery i,Barn i,Free-range i,Organic ~ i,Battery
...
~ i,Organic ¯~ i,Battery
... ¯~ i,Organic
Ri,BCarn ...
Ri,OCr ganic i ^ i,2 ...
^ i,10

 

g-1(i)

 

ln(-i)

( i,Battery

)

l(n i,Barn - i,Battery )

ln( i,Free-range - i,Barn )

ln i,Organic - i,Free-range

~ i,Battery

(

...

)

ln ~ i,Organic - ~ i,Free-range

¯~ i,Battery

(

...

)

ln ¯~ i(,Organic - ¯~ i,Free-ra)nge

ln Ri,BCarn - i,Battery

(

...

)

ln Ri,OCrganic - Ri,FCree-range ()
ln -i

^ i,2 ...

 

N(¯,

V )(indi),

(5)

^ i,10

for the mixture of S multivariate normals as a firststage prior model on the transformed coefficients, and
indi is the latent indicator variable denoting component membership of household i, with indi  {1, . . . , S}. The specification in Equation (5) nests the set of con-
straints illustrated in Table 6:

i i,Barn i,Free-range i,Organic ~ i,Barn

-ei ,

i,Battery + e , i,Barn

 + e , i,Barn

i,Free-range

i,Free-range + e , i,Organic

~ i,Battery + e , ~ i,Barn

...

(6)

¯~ i,Barn ¯~ i,Battery + e , ¯~ i,Barn

...

Ri,BCarn ...

i,Battery + e , Ri,BCarn

i -ei .

Section A.3 in the online appendix provides more details about the MCMC approach and information about prior specifications.
4.4. Discussion of the Consumer Choice Set The specification of our demand model assumes that all households have complete information about the egg products offered by the 10 retailers. In our framework, the final purchase decision is determined not only by the egg product itself (e.g., an egg label in a given package at a particular price) but also by the preference for the specific retail chain, i,l, where the product is offered. For the individual demand specification in Equation (1), we expect retail chain preference coefficients to become very negative--potentially approaching negative infinity--for those chains from which a household never or very infrequently purchased eggs. If a retail chain is estimated to be extremely unattractive to a consumer, the egg prices charged at this chain will not affect this consumer's egg-purchasing decisions, independent of the consumer's actual price knowledge set. This mechanism attenuates a likely bias in the estimate of preference coefficients caused by including alternatives the household did not consider at time of purchase. In Section 5, we empirically illustrate how estimated retail chain coefficients essentially drop egg alternatives of those chains from which a household never purchased eggs. However, this mechanism does not eliminate that across-retail chain price variation will have an impact on individual choices for households

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

265

that purchased eggs at multiple chains during the period of observation. This might cause bias in the estimates of price coefficients for households that do not account for the prices in other--previously and/ or still to be visited--chains when purchasing eggs at any given point in time. The direction of this possible bias is ambiguous. If the chosen egg product is more expensive than the egg-label equivalents in the other equally valued retail chains, individual price sensitivity will be underestimated when the household was in fact not aware of the price differences at time of purchase. Similarly, price sensitivity will be overestimated in the reverse case.28 Section A.5 in the online appendix shows robustness of egg preference estimates based on our full information choice set approach by comparing implied WTP heterogeneity distributions with corresponding distributions obtained with a stricter, limited information choice set assumption.
5. Estimation Results
We estimate the model described in Section 4 and Section A.3 in the online appendix with a successively larger number of mixture components to compare models with more flexible prior heterogeneity specifications and compute their log marginal likelihoods using the Newton­Raftery method on the values trimmed by 1% on the bottom and the top of likelihood draws, as suggested in Dubé et al. (2010) and Gamerman and Lopes (2006).29 According to Table 7, the one normal component model dominates for model fit based on our estimates of log marginal likelihoods.30
Figure 4 shows marginal posterior densities of the egg preference coefficients implied by the one component model. The left panel of the figure illustrates posterior densities of the price and the six-egg package size coefficients. As restricted in the hierarchical prior, both densities support values in only the negative domain. The marginal posterior density of the price coefficient represents several households in its left tail, with a low parameter value being very sensitive to changes in the price of egg products. The marginal posterior density of the package size six coefficient, on the other hand, peaks near zero but also supports households with a strong negative valuation of small package sizes in its left tail. Notably, the variance or implied heterogeneity of the density seems to be much larger compared with the price coefficient. The right panel of the figure plots the marginal posterior densities of the egg-label intercepts. All coefficients reflect the order constraints specified in Section 4, and the densities indicate heterogeneous preferences for the different egg labels across German households. For all four egg-label coefficients, the marginal posterior densities have some households in the left tails with

Table 7. Log Marginal Likelihood Values for Demand Models

One normal component Five normal components Ten normal components

Value
-527,838.9 -528,434.9 -528,760.1

negative preferences for the respective egg label (compared with the outside good) while supporting households with strong preferences in the right tails as well.
Table 8 summarizes quantiles and the first two moments of the marginal posterior distributions of all estimated coefficients implied by the one component model. The numbers confirm the key observations derived from Figure 4. Notably, the marginal posterior distribution of the six-egg package size coefficient exhibits, by far, the largest standard deviation.
Table 8 also includes marginal posterior distributions of egg-label intercepts interacted with Easter and Christmas seasons as well as regime change. Compared with the regular estimates, it is apparent that households have smaller valuations of barn, freerange, and organic eggs relative to the outside good during Easter, which is in line with the model-free evidence presented in Section 3. Furthermore, it seems that battery eggs are slightly more positively valued compared with the outside good during Christmas. It is not clearly evident that preferences shifted after the regulation based on inspecting marginal posteriors of egg labels after regime change.
Table 9 therefore adds a Bayesian equivalent of a significance test for control dummies. The table depicts 95% credibility intervals of the difference between MCMC draws of mean parameters in the hierarchical prior of seasonal and regime change egg labels relative to regular ones. It therefore illustrates whether coefficients are significantly different for the average household at the 95% credibility level. As inferred from Table 8 before, barn, free-range, and organic eggs are, on average, significantly less appealing to consumers during Easter. During Christmas, battery and organic eggs are, on average, significantly more positively valued. Finally, the table illustrates that freerange eggs are slightly lower valued and organic eggs slightly higher valued on average after the policy shift.
Table 8 summarizes marginal posterior distributions of retail chain parameters as well. All distributions exhibit a large standard deviation, indicating heterogeneous preferences for the 10 major retailers in Germany. In Section 4, we argue that it is crucial for our demand framework to recover negative parameter estimates for retail chains a household did not consider. The left panel of Figure 5 verifies that

266

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

Figure 4. (Color online) Marginal Posterior Densities of the Egg Preference Coefficients (, Battery, . . . , Organic, ) for the One Component Model

posterior mean estimates of retail chain parameters are indeed negative for those retailers where household was never observed to purchase eggs. The histogram includes only posterior mean estimates of

households that purchased at least twice at Retailer 1, which was the baseline level in the estimation. In our setting, negative parameter estimates of retailers a household never purchased eggs from are plausible

Table 8. Quantiles and First Two Moments of the Marginal Posterior Densities for the One Component Model, Controlling for Seasonality and Regime Change

Quantiles

Coefficients

5%

25%

50% 75% 95% Mean Standard dev.

Price Battery Barn Free-range Organic Six-pack Battery × Easter Barn × Easter Free-range × Easter Organic × Easter Battery × Christmas Barn × Christmas Free-range × Christmas Organic × Christmas Barn × RC Free-range × RC Organic × RC Chain 2 Chain 3 Chain 4 Chain 5 Chain 6 Chain 7 Chain 8 Chain 9 Chain 10

-11.856 -16.082 -14.097 -12.677 -12.169 -53.563 -15.516 -14.428 -13.205 -12.642 -15.696 -13.628 -12.464 -11.634 -13.694 -12.487 -11.773 -11.337 -5.238 -8.549 -14.007 -8.428 -7.579 -8.386 -8.354 -16.553

-6.871 -11.170
-9.084 -7.889 -7.349 -10.541 -10.997 -9.840 -8.714 -8.049 -10.842 -8.818 -7.788 -6.965 -8.992 -7.875 -7.075 -5.435 -1.100 -3.538 -7.848 -4.001 -3.152 -3.659 -3.812 -10.445

-4.310 -7.600 -5.149 -4.061 -3.490 -4.072 -7.657 -6.259 -5.232 -4.469 -7.332 -5.111 -4.115 -3.298 -5.372 -4.269 -3.380 -0.221
1.739 0.150 -3.308 -0.670 -0.064 -0.276 -0.406 -6.023

-2.677 -4.062 -0.956
0.099 0.634 -1.255 -4.271 -2.368 -1.390 -0.634 -3.876 -1.225 -0.188 0.563 -1.670 -0.481 0.459 5.332 4.931 3.563 1.208 2.529 3.207 3.159 2.970 -1.612

-1.327 0.280 7.444 10.045 11.123
-0.164 -0.183
3.541 5.344 6.467 0.476 5.591 7.878 8.812 3.771 6.608 8.290 11.304 9.083 8.480 7.397 6.944 7.732 7.992 7.574 4.484

-5.207 -7.684 -4.059 -2.610 -1.943 -13.820 -7.694 -5.619 -4.395 -3.631 -7.418 -4.349 -3.048 -2.224 -5.064 -3.333 -2.349 -0.084
1.874 0.035 -3.312 -0.723 0.012 -0.239 -0.411 -6.022

3.535 5.036 10.535 11.808 12.441 52.008 4.728 8.036 8.537 8.673 4.962 9.007 10.052 10.081 6.410 11.310 11.648 7.120 4.372 5.182 6.537 4.699 4.662 4.987 4.871 6.429

Note. dev., Deviation.

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

267

Table 9. Significance of Control Dummies Based on Marginal Posteriors of Mean Parameters in the Hierarchical Prior

2.5% 25% 50% 75% 97.5%

Battery × Easter Barn × Easter Free-range × Easter Organic × Easter Battery × Christmas Barn × Christmas Free-range × Christmas Organic × Christmas Barn × RC Free-range × RC Organic × RC

-0.122 -0.745 -0.689 -0.507
0.134 -0.031 -0.034
0.239 -0.089 -0.165
0.059

-0.050 -0.693 -0.631 -0.449
0.221 0.055 0.057 0.322 -0.043 -0.113 0.105

-0.020 -0.667 -0.606 -0.420
0.266 0.107 0.106 0.363 -0.020 -0.089 0.134

0.010 -0.639 -0.578 -0.387
0.311 0.152 0.149 0.405 -0.000 -0.066 0.160

0.072 -0.585 -0.520 -0.323
0.396 0.235 0.253 0.532 0.035 -0.014 0.216

only once a household actually prefers the baseline, that is, was observed to purchase at Retailer 1. The right panel of the figure indicates that the estimated chain coefficients are actually sufficiently large (in absolute terms) to essentially drop the respective egg alternatives from consumer's consideration, that is, to translate into choice probabilities of approximately zero for the representative choice set in 2008.31
For the purpose of our analysis, it is particularly relevant to analyze the distribution of WTP for different egg labels across households. We compute the posterior distribution of WTP for 10 barn, free-range, and organic eggs compared with 10 battery eggs according to Equation (4), based on draws from marginal posterior distributions as summarized in Table 8. Figure 6 displays the posterior distribution of WTP across households in the German population. We observe that the fraction of households that have

no preference for the higher-quality egg label, in other words, for which the WTP equals zero, diminishes when we move from barn to organic eggs.
In addition, the mass center of the distribution moves farther away from zero. This is also reflected by the mean and median of each distribution, as shown in Table 10. The mean (median) of the WTP distribution for barn eggs is EUR 1.042 (EUR 0.367). Those for free-range and organic eggs are EUR 1.661 (EUR 0.623) and EUR 1.954 (EUR 0.743), respectively. Table A.9 in Section A.5 in the online appendix contains a robustness check for the estimated WTP distributions shown in Figure 6 and Table 10 based on a model assuming limited information available to households at the time of purchase. The comparison provides evidence that as we find differences between the two WTP distributions to be negligibly small, we do not bias demand estimates in our full information approach.
Indifferent households get harmed by banning battery eggs, because they are forced to buy more expensive eggs. Although prices for barn eggs drop after the ban, new equilibrium prices do not match those of battery eggs, which were cheaper. Thus, households with a WTP for barn eggs that is lower than the difference between former battery egg and new barn egg prices, pnBeawrn - poBladttery, also suffer because of the ban. In contrast, all households that have a higher WTP for barn eggs than pnBeawrn - poBladttery benefit from the policy as long as pnBeawrn  poBladrn.
In order to assess which types of households are more likely to be positively or negatively affected by the ban, we investigate the relation between individual-level WTP above battery eggs and households' demographics.32

Figure 5. (Color online) Retail Chain Parameter Posterior Mean Estimates for (Left) the Chains a Household Never Purchased Eggs from and (Right) Implied Choice Probabilities for Egg Alternatives Offered by These Chains at Average Prices in 2008

268

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

Figure 6. (Color online) Posterior Distribution of WTP for Different Egg Categories Compared with Battery Eggs

Note. We compare a pack of 10 eggs of the respective category to a pack of 10 battery eggs.

Table 11 depicts results from relating draws of individual-level posterior WTP distributions on households' demographics in a second stage regression. In order to account for uncertainty in the first stage, we regress individual-level WTP on demographics for each of the 2,000 MCMC draws. As a consequence, we estimate a distribution of regression coefficients reflecting the uncertainty in MCMC draws. The table shows the average effect (over draws) between WTP and demographics with the implied posterior standard deviation in parentheses. We check significance by investigating whether posterior credibility intervals of regression coefficients do not include zero for the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels.33 Whereas demographic variables such as household size, age, share of women, children, and pet indicators are never significant, income and urban indicators are significant, in at least one specification at the 10%

level. Overall, the fact that most demographic variables do not have a significant effect on WTP over battery eggs is also reflected in the low R2 values of all three regressions. It means that observable consumer characteristics alone cannot explain differences in egg preferences, which additionally motivates more flexible specifications of unobserved heterogeneity in the demand model. Notably, income across all specifications is highly significant, and an increase in the monthly net income per adult by EUR 1,000 is associated with a higher WTP for barn eggs by EUR 0.250 on average. For free-range eggs, the increase is around EUR 0.683, and for organic eggs it is about EUR 0.868. In combination with evidence of Figure 3, the results in Table 11 therefore suggest that households in different income groups are not equally affected by the policy shift. For instance, as we further illustrate in Section 6, prices of remaining egg

Table 10. Quantiles and First Two Moments of the Posterior Distribution of WTP for Different Egg Categories Compared with Battery Eggs

Coefficients

5%

Barn Free-range Organic

0.018 0.031 0.048

Note. dev., Deviation.

25%
0.101 0.173 0.237

50%
0.367 0.623 0.743

Quantiles

75%

95%

0.966 1.631 1.894

3.733 5.607 6.580

Mean
1.042 1.661 1.954

Standard dev.
3.608 6.222 6.973

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

269

Table 11. Relationship Between WTP and Demographics

WTP above battery eggs for

Explanatory variables

Barn eggs

Free-range eggs

Organic eggs

Constant Household size Income per adult in 1,000 EUR Urban dummy Age of head of household Share of women in household Children in household Pet in household Sample size R2

0.500** (0.214) -0.031 (0.037) 0.250*** (0.066) 0.089 (0.074) 0.002 (0.003) 0.183 (0.138) 0.086 (0.102) -0.025 (0.067)
6,961 0.005

0.575 (0.421) -0.033 (0.076) 0.683*** (0.142) 0.227 (0.149) -0.000 (0.005) 0.340 (0.263) 0.014 (0.236) -0.117 (0.140)
6,961 0.009

0.751* (0.476) -0.031 (0.085) 0.868*** (0.153) 0.330* (0.158) -0.004 (0.006) 0.399 (0.302) 0.054 (0.263) -0.190 (0.158)
6,961 0.011

Note. Posterior standard deviations are in parentheses. Significant at the 10% level; significant at the 5% level; significant at the 1% level.

products typically fall after the policy intervention. As a result, banning the low-quality alternative redistributes welfare from households that do not value animal welfare to households that are willing to pay a premium for animal welfare. As the share of animal welfare­valuing households increases with higher income, this policy has a regressive impact on consumers.
6. Redistributive Effects on Consumer Welfare and Policy Implications
In the previous section, we illustrated that the willingness to pay for animal welfare­differentiated eggs varies across German households. We expect that typical battery egg buyers are harmed by the ban on battery eggs as, everything else equal, we do not expect prices of the new minimum quality alternative, barn eggs, to fall below preban battery egg prices. We theorize that consumer welfare for households preferring barn, free-range, and organic eggs may even rise because of the high-end price drop and the effect is determined by the equilibrium price changes of the animal welfare­differentiated egg products after the ban. We also show that higher-income households have, on average, a greater willingness to pay for eggs that provide greater animal welfare. Thus, we conjecture that lower-income groups exhibit higher welfare losses following a product ban for animal welfare reasons than higher income groups. In order to quantify these effects, we introduce an explicit supply-side model for the 10 major retail chains in Germany. Our goal is to identify the isolated effect of higher minimum quality

standards on prices and consumer welfare, and therefore we run the majority of counterfactuals without inducing the shift in egg tier preferences estimated in Section 5. This section is composed of two parts. The first part, Section 6.1, introduces the supply model and defines how we estimate changes in consumer welfare after a policy change. The second part, Section 6.2, quantifies equilibrium price reactions on the supply side and implied changes in consumer welfare followed by increasing minimum quality standards for different counterfactual settings. In addition, this section discusses policy implications and estimates the required cost reduction to protect low-income consumers that suffer, on average, the highest welfare losses following the introduction of higher minimum quality standards.

6.1. Supply Model

The supply model closely follows the established

notation in the empirical industrial organization litera-

ture, as in Nevo (2001), and the structural marketing

literature, as in Sudhir (2001). We assume M com-

panies and L multiproduct retail chains. Each retail

chain l belongs to a company m and offers a set of

quality-differentiated products. Each company maxi-

mizes its profits

[ ] ( )

m

pj - cj sj p D,

(7)

jSm

for m 1, . . . , M, where sj(p) equals the market share of product j, D denotes the market size, and Sm is the set of products offered by retail chains belonging

270

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

to company m.34 Retail chains compete in a purestrategy Nash­Bertrand game with differentiated products. This leads to the following first-order conditions:

() sj p

+

J
k1

(  k,

)[ j pk

-

] ck

sk pj

0,

(8)

for j 1, . . . , J, where  is a (J × J)-matrix defining the

product ownership structure from the perspective of

the company with (k, j) 1 if both product k and

product j are offered by retail chains of the same

company (and zero otherwise). Matrix notation al-

lows for a more elegant representation of the first-

order conditions:

()

()

s p + [  ] p - c 0,

(9)

where  denotes a matrix of partial demand derivatives with respect to price with (k, j) sj/pk. The  represents an element-by-element matrix multiplication. The vectors of market shares, prices, and marginal costs are represented by s(p), p, and c respectively.
In our setting, market share sj(p) is a function of households' preferences, as specified in Equation (2). As our model incorporates heterogeneous preferences, expected market shares are obtained by integrating over the distribution of households' preferences.
We follow Pachali et al. (2018) and rely on a procedure defined as the lower-level model nonsmoothed (n.s.) to estimate the preference distribution representing the relevant population of German households. The implied estimate of posterior expected market share is given by

() sj p

1 W

N
i1

wi



{

}(

)( )( )

Pr j|p, h  h|yi,   |Y d h,  ,

(10)

where Y (y1, . . . , yi , . . . , yN) and {wi} are householdspecific projection factors denoting the number of

households observation

in the i in the

psoapmuplaletiaonndreWpresenNi t1ewdi.bTyheeaecsh-

timator in Equation (10) uses yi both to inform the

posterior of parameters in the hierarchical prior, (|Y),

and predict new households' preferences based on

individual-level posteriors, (h|yi, ). Intuitively, this approach integrates over individual-level posterior

distributions and not only is less dependent on the func-

tional form assumed in the first-stage model, but also

allows us to rely on projection factors to form a repre-

sentative distribution of preferences from the posterior output of the model.35

We make the following two simplifying assump-

tions to reduce the complexity in our supply-side model.

First, because computing market equilibrium prices

with several retailers and a high degree of preference

heterogeneity is computationally burdensome, we

restrict ourselves to using average prices and the market size recorded in 2008 in the off-season period.36

Second, in order to ease comparability, we assume only packages of 10 eggs are offered.37

As part of our policy evaluation, we seek to illus-

trate the redistributive effects of higher minimum

quality standards on consumer welfare. We follow

Small and Rosen (1981) and Train (2009) to calculate

changes in expected consumer welfare for multino-

mial logit demand models. As specified in Equation (1),

each household's indirect utility from choice alter-

native j can be separated into a deterministic part Vij and nondeterministic part ij. Small and Rosen (1981) derive the solution for the case that ij is i.i.d. extreme value distributed and the price coefficient is constant

with respect to income. We measure the change in

consumer welfare as

[(

)(

)]

E(CWi)

1 -i

ln

 e J

Vij

j1

- ln J eVij
j1

,

(11)

where E(CWi) is a function of preferences i, and the superscripts  and  refer to the status quo and to the counterfactual scenario respectively (in our case, before and after increasing the minimum quality standard for eggs).
We approximate total changes in consumer welfare by taking the aggregate of Equation (11) evaluated at all draws from the preference distribution implied by the lower-level model (n.s.) with weights in order to extrapolate the total market size D observed in 2008, that is,



R

E(CWr) :

g · E(CWr),

(12)

r1

for r 1, . . . , R and g D/R.38 In order to illustrate the distributional effect, we
also evaluate Equation (12) within the 10 different income classes motivated in Section 3. We note that Equation (11) likely overestimates the absolute change in consumer welfare because it integrates over the idiosyncratic logit taste term distribution. As implied by any logit demand model, a consumer receives (in expectation) utility even from irrelevant products. By definition, we can increase consumer welfare by simply duplicating the existing products. On the other side, removing products will substantially decrease consumer welfare although almost identical products sold at comparable prices are still available. The relative differences across the different income groups, however, are correct as all groups lose the same amount of products (and thus the same number of logit error draws).

6.2. Counterfactual Simulations The supply model enables us to isolate equilibrium price reactions caused by a policy change and to

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

271

identify the redistributive effects on consumer welfare.39 As shown in Equation (9), equilibrium price reactions depend on retail-chain-specific marginal costs and demand parameters. Because marginal costs are not observable, we extract retail-chainspecific marginal costs by solving Equation (9) with given market prices in 2008. The ownership matrix  is specified according to the real ownership structure in the German retail landscape in 2008 with M 5 and L 10, that is, the 10 retail chains owned by five major retail companies.
Table 12 illustrates the resulting estimates of marginal costs (c), the average of prices in 2008 (p), margins (p - c), and estimates of market shares (s) for egg products offered at all retail chains. For all retail chains, margins increase as we move up from battery eggs to organic eggs. This pattern is reasonable as animal welfare­valuing households are often less price sensitive and are willing to pay an extra premium for a promise of better animal welfare. We observe heterogeneity in marginal costs across retail chains. Likely reasons for these cost differences are, for example, retailer-specific quantity rebates or structural differences between farmers cooperating with retailers (i.e., fullline or premium supermarkets usually prefer cooperating with regional farmers, whereas discounters more often cooperate with larger, supraregional egg suppliers). However, some of the differences are very large; for example, Retailer 2's marginal costs for organic eggs are EUR 0.99 compared with EUR 2.14 for Retailer 9. Reading these numbers, one should take into account that they reflect retailers' economic opportunity costs rather than their pure accounting costs. Conditional on the estimated preference structure and market prices in 2008, the model predicts high costs for chains with particularly small market shares. Economically, it implies that such retailers are relatively inefficient at providing eggs in the marketplace. Although we think that our marginal cost estimates are quite reasonable for the majority of retailer­product combinations, unrealistically large differences between retailers might also be caused by shortcomings or limitations of our demand and supply models. However, based on the robustness checks shown in Tables A.8 and A.10 in the online appendix, we can at least rule out that the large differences are driven by the constraints and the full information approach we employ.
Next, we use retail-chain-specific cost estimates in Table 12 to simulate equilibrium prices after a ban on battery eggs.40 The first three columns in Table 13 show market-share-weighted average marginal costs (c¯) for each egg label implied by Table 12, the acrossretail chain market-share-weighted average of prices in 2008 (p¯), and the simulated market-share-weighted average of adjusted prices (p¯ ) after increasing minimum quality standards.41 We observe that prices of

Table 12. Marginal Costs, Prices, Margins, and Market Shares

Retailer: Egg product

c

p

p-c

s

Retailer 1: Free-range, 10 units

0.85 1.51 0.65 5.80

Retailer 1: Barn, 10 units

0.75 1.25 0.50 7.62

Retailer 2: Organic, 10 units

0.99 2.44 1.45 2.43

Retailer 2: Free-range, 10 units

0.70 1.51 0.81 5.73

Retailer 2: Barn, 10 units

0.62 1.27 0.65 3.72

Retailer 2: Battery, 10 units

0.49 0.92 0.44 3.09

Retailer 3: Organic, 10 units

1.58 2.29 0.71 0.79

Retailer 3: Free-range, 10 units

0.89 1.51 0.61 5.36

Retailer 3: Barn, 10 units

0.69 1.26 0.57 8.05

Retailer 3: Battery, 10 units

0.43 0.91 0.48 6.06

Retailer 4: Organic, 10 units

1.53 2.43 0.90 0.63

Retailer 4: Free-range, 10 units

0.88 1.58 0.70 2.05

Retailer 4: Barn, 10 units

0.67 1.28 0.61 2.52

Retailer 4: Battery, 10 units

0.32 0.90 0.57 8.36

Retailer 5: Organic, 10 units

1.85 3.04 1.19 0.36

Retailer 5: Free-range, 10 units

1.42 2.19 0.77 0.44

Retailer 5: Barn, 10 units

1.33 1.98 0.65 0.14

Retailer 5: Battery, 10 units

0.50 1.01 0.51 1.31

Retailer 6: Organic, 10 units

1.92 2.54 0.62 0.23

Retailer 6: Free-range, 10 units

1.16 1.52 0.37 0.79

Retailer 6: Barn, 10 units

1.06 1.37 0.32 0.62

Retailer 6: Battery, 10 units

0.63 0.90 0.27 3.41

Retailer 7: Organic, 10 units

1.44 2.40 0.96 0.85

Retailer 7: Free-range, 10 units

0.93 1.53 0.60 2.58

Retailer 7: Barn, 10 units

0.81 1.25 0.43 2.59

Retailer 7: Battery, 10 units

0.54 0.92 0.38 4.23

Retailer 8: Organic, 10 units

1.98 2.98 1.00 0.35

Retailer 8: Free-range, 10 units

1.28 1.95 0.67 1.12

Retailer 8: Barn, 10 units

1.13 1.60 0.46 0.86

Retailer 8: Battery, 10 units

0.71 1.05 0.33 2.40

Retailer 9: Organic, 10 units

2.14 3.08 0.94 0.34

Retailer 9: Free-range, 10 units

1.45 2.10 0.65 0.77

Retailer 9: Barn, 10 units

1.31 1.85 0.54 0.21

Retailer 9: Battery, 10 units

0.68 1.04 0.36 1.82

Retailer 10: Organic, 10 units

1.97 2.82 0.85 0.05

Retailer 10: Free-range, 10 units 1.39 2.08 0.69 0.15

Retailer 10: Barn, 10 units

0.96 1.51 0.54 0.16

Retailer 10: Battery, 10 units

0.63 1.06 0.43 0.25

the remaining egg products fall according to our model, on average, after a ban on battery eggs. Thus, the ban definitely benefits some type of consumers: Households that already prefer barn, free-range, and organic eggs over battery eggs under preban prices face lower postban prices on average. As higher-income households have, on average, a greater willingness to pay for hen welfare­differentiated eggs, we provide evidence of a regressive effect of the ban, where low-income households lose, on average, more than high-income households. From the policy maker's perspective, this is an unintended side effect of the ban, a point we further elaborate on at the end of this section.
According to Figure 6, a fraction of households are always indifferent between battery eggs, the old minimum quality standard, and barn eggs, the new minimum quality standard. Thus, in order to offset the regressive effects of setting barn eggs as the new

272

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

Table 13. Optimal Subsidy and Welfare Effects of Product Bans Under Different Scenarios of Competition

Retail market structure

Product

c¯ p¯

real

p¯

p¯ 

Duopoly

p¯

p¯

p¯ 

Monopoly

p¯

p¯

p¯ 

Organic, 10 units

1.39 2.52 2.47 2.59 2.86 2.79 2.98 3.77 3.61 4.43

Free-range, 10 units

0.89 1.57 1.51 1.66 1.89 1.80 2.05 2.47 2.27 3.20

Barn, 10 units

0.74 1.28 1.22 0.93 1.53 1.43 1.05 2.04 1.73 1.38

Battery, 10 units 

0.49 0.93

1.05

1.38

0.32

0.49

0.94

T 

(in million EUR) m (in million EUR) E(CWr) (in million EUR)

124.40 -17.85 4.51 -31.25 50.60

196.33 -23.93 -13.95 -30.90 71.96

351.50 -49.82 11.80
11.03 64.52

minimum quality standard, new equilibrium prices of barn eggs must match the previous battery egg prices.
We estimate the marginal cost reduction for barn eggs needed to offset the regressive effect. This cost reduction can be motivated by policy makers actively intervening in a market and introducing a subsidy to soften the regressive effect. For more emerging industries other than the egg market, cost reductions could also naturally occur by economics of scale because of a narrower product assortment.42
Decision makers and consumer protection agencies, such as the Federal Trade Commission, could use our approach to infer the necessary marginal cost reduction and compare it to the expected reduction in costs stated by industry experts. If the expected reduction in costs is close to the necessary cost reduction, the policy of increasing the minimum quality standard is unproblematic in terms of regressivity and consumer harm. Alternatively, a tailored subsidy can be proposed to soften the regressive effect if desired.
At first glance, it might seem unrealistic to implement a subsidy for a consumer good, but there are precedents in other markets. In 2016, the German government implemented a subsidy of EUR 4,000 for consumers buying an electric car to stimulate electric mobility.43 In the EU, the largest share of budget is spent for subsidies in the agricultural sector. At the moment, the agricultural subsidies are mainly direct payments to farmers per eligible hectare and tied to specific conditions.44 In principle, these agricultural subsidies could also be used in an entirely different way to regulate and stimulate certain production standards within a product category such as eggs or meat. There is actually already an indirect subsidy for consumer goods of basic need and cultural goods in Germany, as consumers pay a reduced value-added tax of 7% for some products such as food, books, and public transport instead of the usual 19% value-added tax. Likewise, another possible way to implement the subsidy would be to mandate a reduced value-added

tax and condition it on a certain production standard to reduce the regressive effect of a higher minimum quality standard. We use the terms subsidy and marginal cost reduction interchangeably because a per-unit subsidy shifts the marginal cost curve downward. Let  be the required subsidy to offset the regressive effect; then T s^barnD denotes the total expenditure for financing the subsidy if marginal costs are staying constant.45 In this case, T can be interpreted as the implied cost to society of increasing the minimum quality standard without harming rather poor consumers.
The fourth column in Table 13 corresponds to the average equilibrium price vector p¯ in the situation where barn eggs are subsidized. Accordingly, barn eggs would have to be subsidized by EUR 0.32 per cpchoanacnksugamgeeienrofiwn1de0ulfsaetgrregysp. rFoufiErt(tsChWerrm) oarmse,awnwedelltchaoesmcthphauentegtoetthianel expenditure for financing the subsidy given by T. Notably, average prices of free-range and organic eggs rise as a consequence of the subsidy.
6.2.1. The Impact of Retail Market Structure. In the remaining columns of Table 13, we vary the degree of retail competition by altering the product ownership matrix  to highlight the relevance of market structure in determining the outcomes. Besides the realistic benchmark case, we consider two other cases: a duopoly case with M 2, in which all discounters are owned by one company and all full-line supermarkets are owned by another, and a monopoly case with M 1. In the last case, we assume the whole retail market to be monopolized. The results show that margins for all types of eggs increase, on average, with a lower degree of retail competition.
In all three scenarios of competition, we observe that prices of the remaining egg products fall, on average, after a ban on battery eggs, suggesting that the regressive effect of the ban is evident across different scenarios of market structure.

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

273

The extent and direction of the price reactions depend on two factors: the degree of substitutability between products and market structure. A close substitute of the old minimum quality standard will usually exhibit a drop in equilibrium prices. Less competition between firms results in a steeper drop in prices for close substitute products. This is due to the trade-off between margin and quantity that becomes stronger in less competitive markets. As a consequence, the change in aggregate consumer welfare, CW, after increasing the minimum quality standard is actually positive in the monopoly case. Thus, in this scenario, gains of barn, free-range, and organic egg­ preferring households outweigh losses of battery egg­ preferring consumers.
The market structure determines the optimal level of the subsidy . The less competitive the retail sector is, the higher the subsidy  must be to offset the regressive effect of a higher minimum quality standard. This observation can be explained by the relationship between pass-through rates and pricing power. Typically, changes in costs are not fully transmitted to final prices unless firms have zero margins. With higher pricing power, that is, higher margins, a smaller fraction of changes in costs is passed on to final consumers. Firms with more pricing power will tend to keep a higher portion of this subsidy/cost reduction to themselves.46 By changing the market structure in our counterfactual scenarios, we give the retail chains more pricing power.
However, it should be noted that a marginal cost reduction for the new minimum quality standard also has some drawbacks. The first drawback is with respect to substitution patterns toward egg products that offer lower animal welfare. Table 14 illustrates an increase in market share of barn eggs as a consequence of lower barn egg prices and higher free-range and organic egg prices. As the subsidy reduces barn egg unit costs, they become more profitable, and retail chains will try to divert more demand toward barn eggs, which explains these price reactions. This indicates that there is a negative cross-product cost pass-through rate. Second, if the marginal cost reduction is realized through a subsidy, it does not

restore social welfare completely, as the sum of producer and consumer surplus is only a fraction of total subsidy expenditure; that is, there is a dead-weight loss. Finally, we note that a subsidy has a progressive policy implication, as prices of the other higher-quality egg labels rise in equilibrium.
6.2.2. Even Higher Minimum Quality Standards. In the next step, we successively increase the minimum quality standard until only organic eggs remain on the market. This scenario considers a possible future where only organic and sustainable products are allowed. Furthermore, we again determine the subsidy to offset the regressive effects. (Table 15 shows our findings.) As  increases with a higher minimum quality standard, so does the extent of the regressive effect. If only organic eggs remain on the market, the majority of consumers lose surplus and only a minority benefits from the policy. Table 16 shows the impact on market shares under higher minimum quality standards. Similarly, as before, the subsidy incentivizes households to substitute higher-animalwelfare egg products for the new subsidized minimum quality alternative.
The economic mechanism driving these pricing reactions is also related to the literature studying pharmaceutical markets and the so-called brandname price puzzle. In particular, the logic behind our observed pricing pattern is actually a reversed version of the brand-name price puzzle in the prescription drug market after patent expiry. The brandname price puzzle states the (at first glance, odd) observation that after patent expiry and entry of generic products, the price of the originally patented brand-name drug increases although competition intensified through losing the former monopoly awarded by the patent (e.g., Frank and Salkever 1992, Grabowski and Vernon 1992, Ching 2010). The solution to the puzzle is that it reflects market segmentation. As a segment of price-sensitive consumers switches to generic drugs (which are perceived to have lower quality), only price-insensitive consumers remain with the brand-name drug after patent expiry. This causes the brand-name drug manufacturer to

Table 14. Market Shares After Product Bans Under Different Scenarios of Competition

Product
Organic, 10 units Free-range, 10 units Barn, 10 units Battery, 10 units Outside good

s^
6.08 24.75 26.93 30.61 11.63

real
s^
6.48 30.14 48.88
14.50

s^
5.66 16.53 67.40
10.41

Retail market structure

Duopoly

s^

s^

s^

5.41 20.44 24.10 32.19 17.87

5.78 25.29 46.00
22.92

4.82 11.62 69.48
14.09

Monopoly

s^

s^

s^

3.42 14.35 16.21 28.05 37.97

3.64 17.18 37.55
41.63

2.50 4.50 65.05
27.94

274

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

Table 15. Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Negating the Regressive Effect

New minimum quality standard

Barn

Free-range

Organic

Product

c¯

p¯

p¯

p¯ 

p¯

p¯ 

p¯

p¯ 

Organic, 10 units

1.39 2.52 2.47 2.59 2.33 2.66

1.96 0.93

Free-range, 10 units

0.89 1.57 1.51 1.66 1.39 0.93

Barn, 10 units

0.74 1.28 1.22 0.93

Battery, 10 units

0.49 0.93



0.32

0.51

1.09

T 

(in million EUR) m (in million EUR) E(CWr) (in million EUR)

-17.85 -31.25

124.40 4.51 50.60

-45.75 -86.55

257.45 3.90
122.82

-128.29 -323.25

575.27 29.94
125.09

raise the price and optimize its margin. This is the same logic as in our case of banning the low-quality-tier product: instead of observing entry, we observe exit of a lower-quality-tier product, and firms lose one instrument for market segmentation. As a result, retailers lower prices of close substitutes to attract price-sensitive consumers. This pattern is also related to the research on private-label introduction in the food industry. Ward et al. (2002) identify a similar pricing response of brand-name products following private-label invasion in the U.S. food retail industry. Using grocery scanner data in 32 food and beverage industries, they find that brand-name firms' tend to rise prices and reduce promotional activities in response to private-label entry. Similar to our explanation of retailers' price responses after the ban of battery eggs, Ward et al. (2002) rationalize their empirical findings using the theory of product differentiation as developed by, for example, Perloff and Salop (1985).
6.2.3. Redistributive Effect on Different Consumer Segments. Finally, we further examine changes in consumer welfare across different consumer segments. Tables 17 and 18 contain the effects on consumer welfare across 10 different income groups of consumers. We report also the average income per adult for each consumer segment. Average income per adult increases as we move up from Income Group 1 to 10. These groups are the same as presented in our model-free evidence in Section 3.
Starting with the real mode of competition in Table 17, we observe that through the drop in prices for eggs that provide higher animal welfare (p  p ), lowincome groups exhibit a higher loss in consumer welfare than high-income groups. This observation is supported by our model-free evidence shown in Figure 3, which showed that the battery egg market share decreased from Income Group 1 to 10. Thus, low-income groups have a higher proportion of battery egg buyers who are negatively affected by this policy and a lower proportion of barn, free-range, and

organic egg buyers who benefit. The effect on consumer welfare is therefore regressive.
However, as we lower the degree of competition in the retail sector, the welfare losses due to banning battery eggs decrease in tendency across all consumer segments. In the case of a monopolized retail sector, we observe aggregate consumer welfare increases within all consumer groups, except for the lowestincome group. This result is explained by the steeper price reactions following the rise of the minimum quality standard in cases where retail chains have more pricing power.
Our model shows the subsidy  is able to offset this regressive effect. In fact, lower-income groups would benefit the most. As the subsidy leads to higher prices for the remaining higher-quality eggs, higher-income groups benefit less. The effect of combining the ban with a subsidy is then progressive.
The consumer welfare effects of a future scenario of further increasing the minimum quality standards can be observed in Table 18. As the new minimum quality standard is further increased to free-range eggs or even to organic eggs, a larger share of households within each income group is negatively affected. Notably, the difference in consumer welfare losses between the lowest- and highest-income groups increases with an even more restricted minimum quality standard. Thus, the regressive effect becomes even stronger.

Table 16. Market Shares and Higher Minimum Quality Standards

New minimum quality standard

Product

Barn

Free-range Organic

s^

s^

s^

s^

s^

s^

s^

Organic, 10 units 6.08 6.48 5.66 8.21 4.21 49.02 91.70

Free-range, 10 units 24.75 30.14 16.53 72.55 87.80

Barn, 10 units

26.93 48.88 67.40

Battery, 10 units 30.61

Outside good

11.63 14.50 10.41 19.23 7.99 50.98 8.30

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

275

Table 17. Consumer Welfare Effects Across Different Income Groups and Retail Market Structure

Income group
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Overall

Average income (EUR)
503.44 711.46 858.61 988.95 1,115.20 1,260.83 1,418.63 1,627.28 1,923.78 2,950.51 1,225.75

Retail market structure

real

Duopoly

 Monopoly

pp

p  p p  p p  p p  p  E(CWr) in million EUR

p  p

-5.49 -4.83 -4.45 -3.45 -3.13 -2.73 -2.82 -1.87 -1.48 -1.01 -31.25

6.69 6.63 6.94 5.97 5.70 5.38 4.58 3.90 2.72 2.10 50.60

-5.61 -4.79 -4.61 -3.40 -3.10 -2.61 -2.82 -1.75 -1.29 -0.93 -30.90

9.71 9.67 9.81 8.59 7.99 7.63 6.41 5.49 3.84 2.83 71.96

-0.39 0.56 0.31 1.17 1.26 1.71 1.39 1.90 1.64 1.49 11.03

9.75 9.34 9.83 8.35 7.74 7.02 5.06 4.12 2.25 1.06 64.52

Interestingly, in the case of mandating organic eggs as the minimum quality standard in combination with a subsidy, the policy is still regressive, as higherincome groups benefit more from the subsidy because they have a higher proportion of consumers that actually value organic eggs over battery eggs.
6.2.4. Robustness Checks. As our benchmark analysis already involves costly computation of several scenarios, we rerun our counterfactuals for a subset of scenarios while altering our key assumptions in two dimensions: choice sets and stability of egg preferences. Our demand framework assumes that households have complete information about the egg products offered by the 10 retailers. As a robustness check, we also model demand that assumes limited information available to households at time of purchase. Section A.5 in the online appendix summarizes the results after limiting the egg product alternatives in a given choice occasion to the eggs offered in the retail chain of purchase. Notably, in terms of estimating the WTP for different egg quality tiers, the results do not change. This alternative assumption has, however, an even stronger impact on our supply model. With the limited choice set assumption, retail chains are effectively local monopolies and, as a consequence, systematically achieve higher margins, which turns most of the marginal cost estimates to negative in Table A.10 in the online appendix. The cost estimates from our original approach in Table 12 are therefore more realistic and support our assumption of including retail competition in the demand and supply model. While the level of cost estimates and margins seem unrealistic with this alternative assumption, the overall direction of the equilibrium price effects after the ban is similar to that in our

original model. In particular, barn, free-range, and organic egg prices fall after the ban of battery eggs. The price reactions, however, are more extreme after the ban if retail firms are local monopolies, resulting in an increase in aggregate consumer welfare after the ban of battery eggs. This is explained by the observation that high-income households gain, on average, more consumer welfare than low-income households lose (see Table A.13 in the online appendix). Thus, the regressive impact of the policy shift remains under this different assumption.
In our demand estimation in Section 5, we control for a possible shift in egg preferences after the policy change. As another robustness check, we rerun the counterfactual simulations where we subsequently increase the minimum standards with the difference that banning battery eggs induces the shift in preferences as estimated in Section 5. In Section A.7 in the online appendix, we show the equivalents to Tables 15, 16, and 18 under this different assumption. The main insight from this robustness check is that our price reactions and regressive effect do not qualitatively change, but the overall loss in consumer welfare is lower, as the ban on battery eggs increases consumers' valuations for organic eggs on average under this assumption. Thus, more consumers benefit here from the fall in organic egg prices compared with our original model.
6.2.5. Redistributive Effect on Retailer Profits. Our study focuses on the consumer welfare implications of higher minimum quality standards. Another interesting aspect is how the ban affects retailer profits. In particular, we examine whether retail chains with a higher-income or lower-income customer base are differently affected. Table 19 shows how profits

276

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

Table 18. Consumer Welfare Effects Across Different Income Groups and Higher Minimum Quality Standards

New minimum quality standard

Income group
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Overall

Average income (EUR)
503.44 711.46 858.61 988.95 1,115.20 1,260.83 1,418.63 1,627.28 1,923.78 2,950.51 1,225.75

Barn

Free-range

Organic

pp

p  p p  p p  p p  p  E(CWr) in million EUR

p  p

-5.49 -4.83 -4.45 -3.45 -3.13 -2.73 -2.82 -1.87 -1.48 -1.01 -31.25

6.69 6.63 6.94 5.97 5.70 5.38 4.58 3.90 2.72 2.10 50.60

-13.28 -12.16 -11.95 -9.72 -9.05 -8.33 -8.02 -6.20 -4.52 -3.30 -86.55

12.86 14.32 13.27 12.98 13.45 13.67 12.99 11.94 9.53 7.82 122.82

-40.36 -42.18 -39.65 -34.61 -36.15 -33.55 -32.72 -27.40 -20.61 -16.03 -323.25

9.34 10.95 9.31 12.42 11.80 13.67 13.83 14.84 14.45 14.48 125.09

change across retail chains. All retail chains in the first five rows are discounters, and the rest are full-line supermarkets. As expected, we observe that the average income per customer tends to be higher for full-line supermarkets than for discounters. When the minimum quality standard increases, competition among retailers for the price-sensitive consumer segment amplifies. Retailers with relative cost efficiency gains that are able to further drop prices of closest substitutes potentially benefit in the long-term equilibrium after a ban. This becomes evident when reconsidering Table 12, which compares marginal cost estimates for different quality tiers across retailers. According to Table 19, profits at Retailers 1 and 2 improve after banning battery eggs. At the same time, these two

retailers have low marginal costs for above-battery quality tiers and thus relative cost efficiency gains. On the other side, it is costly to offer higher-quality eggs for Retailers 6, 5, 8, 9, and 10, which all together lose profits after increasing minimum quality standards according to Table 19. The reason that Retailers 3 and 4 exhibit the highest losses in profits, while being cost efficient, is that these two retail chains had the lowest marginal costs for the battery eggs that got banned.
The system of subsidies maintains heterogeneity in retailer profits. Given the same unit subsidy for each retailer, chains with lower marginal costs for higher quality tiers (i.e., more efficiency) are able to further attract price-sensitive consumers. In summary, these

Table 19. Firm's Profit Effects Across Different Retailers and Higher Minimum Quality Standards

New minimum quality standard

Barn

Free-range

Organic

p  p p  p p  p p  p p  p p  p

Avg. income of customers (EUR)

Retailer 1 Retailer 2 Retailer 3 Retailer 6 Retailer 7 Retailer 4 Retailer 5 Retailer 8 Retailer 9 Retailer 10 Overall

1,158.32 1,377.65 1,173.03 1,050.01 1,122.25 1,323.03 1,188.11 1,463.09 1,408.54 1,216.12 1,224.25

4.46 0.92 -4.11 -2.93 -1.36 -6.29 -2.81 -2.46 -3.02 -0.25 -17.85

l in million EUR

7.55 4.18 1.57 -2.09 0.76 -1.93 -2.25 -1.19 -2.17 0.08 4.51

2.24 -0.81 -14.80 -3.44 -2.78 -14.18 -3.32 -4.05 -3.81 -0.80 -45.75

11.90 8.48 -4.78 -0.60 2.20 -6.40 -2.18 -1.96 -2.25 -0.52 3.90

-44.51 3.78
-31.10 -6.49 -3.87 -29.00 -4.44 -6.33 -5.18 -1.14 -128.29

-44.51 61.18 -2.69 -2.17 21.14 -0.16 -0.69 -0.24 -1.67 -0.26 29.94

Notes. Retail chains in the first five rows are discounters and the rest are full-line supermarkets. Avg., average.

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

277

results indicate that minimum quality regulations tend to benefit firms that are more cost efficient on the new quality floor.
We note that Retailer 1 is somehow special, as it does not have battery nor organic eggs in its assortment. Therefore, it especially benefits from the ban of battery eggs as its competitors lose a low-cost product. Similarly, if organic eggs are the new quality standard, this retail chain loses all its profits because of the "everything else equal" assumption of the counterfactual.
7. Conclusion
In this paper, we empirically examine the redistributive effects of higher minimum quality standards on consumer welfare. As animal welfare is a form of product quality, we use German household purchase data on eggs to answer this question. More specifically, we study the impact of the EU's ban on battery eggs, the previous minimum quality standard, on household egg purchases and evaluate its redistributive effect on consumer welfare. In our main analysis, we estimate a hierarchical Bayesian multinomial logit model with a flexible mixture of normals first-stage prior to account for consumer heterogeneity.
The results show substantial heterogeneity in preferences across households for animal welfare­ differentiated eggs. Our structural model makes it possible to isolate the price effect of mandating higher minimum quality standards. Prices of the remaining higher-quality eggs typically fall after increasing the minimum quality standard. This means that consumer welfare is essentially redistributed from households that do not value animal welfare to households that are willing to pay a premium for animal welfare. As higher-income households are willing to pay, on average, more for eggs that provide better animal welfare, this provides evidence of a regressive impact of higher minimum quality standards on households in Germany. Our findings suggest that equilibrium price reactions on the supply side are a major driver for the regressive impact of higher minimum quality standards.
Using counterfactual studies, we show how consumer protection agencies can estimate the necessary reduction in marginal costs of the new minimum quality standard needed to offset the regressive effect. As the market structure is less competitive, the marginal cost reduction must be higher. This cost reduction can be achieved either by implementing a subsidy or by other factors that effectively lower the marginal costs of production such as unexploited economics of scale that are triggered by the higher demand for the new minimum quality standard. We emphasize, however, that cost reductions due to economics of scale are not likely to occur in rather mature industries such as

the egg market. So more generally, if the expected reduction in costs is close to the necessary cost reduction, the policy of increasing the minimum quality standard is less likely to harm low-income households.
Finally, we examine hypothetical future scenarios by successively increasing the minimum quality standard until only organic eggs remain on the market. The regressive effect becomes larger as we increase the new minimum quality standard. Our model finds that the costs of the compensating subsidy increase with higher minimum quality standard levels.
The insights generated in this study are not limited to the egg market, but should sensitize policy makers to the possible regressive effects of increasing minimum quality standards in general. Ideally, policy makers should assess equilibrium price effects and expected reduction in marginal costs before mandating a higher quality floor on products, as is done in merger cases.
Although we provide several robustness checks and additional counterfactuals to verify our main findings, our model is not without limitations. For example, we do not include smaller package sizes in our counterfactuals, as this would further increase the computational burden for each of the many scenarios we simulate and would make it even more difficult to extract marginal costs for all product alternatives at different package sizes. Furthermore, we also do not explicitly model the vertical relation between retail chains and egg suppliers. We do not have information about strong prominent brands of egg suppliers and have reason to believe that egg suppliers do not have much pricing power in the upstream market. This is especially evident following the ban of battery eggs in 2010, where retail prices of barn eggs did not increase at the same time, even though market shares of barn eggs almost doubled. Finally, as we study only fresh egg purchases at discounters and supermarkets, we cannot generalize our insights to egg purchases at farmer's markets and indirect egg consumption in the food processing industry.
Going forward, future research could extend our analysis to markets with asymmetric information on quality (i.e., quality that is not observed by everyone) and markets with externalities. Furthermore, another study could focus on the long-term consequences of the product ban on farmers in the upstream market. In particular, it would be interesting to better understand whether and how shocks on the upstream market are transmitted to retail prices.
Acknowledgments Author names are in alphabetic order. Both authors contributed equally to this paper. This paper is part of both authors' PhD theses. They thank their advisors, Roman Inderst and

278

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

Thomas Otter, for continuous support and guidance. This paper benefited from discussions with Pradeep Chintagunta, Bryan Bollinger, Matthew Backus, Helena Perrone, Jacob Seifert, and Christine Zulehner. The authors thank seminar and conference participants at the 2017 International Conference on Competition and Regulation "Advances in the Analysis of Competition Policy and Regulation," the 2017 Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, the 2017 Quantitative Marketing and Economics Conference, and the 2017 Conference of the European Association for Research in Industrial Economics for their questions and suggestions. The empirical results are based on data from the Nielsen Company (Germany) GmbH. Any analysis calculated (or derived) and conclusion drawn from the data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein. Any errors are the authors'.
Endnotes
1 For instance, the EU banned conventional light bulbs and nickelcadmium batteries in 2009. 2 For instance, the New York City Health Department banned largesized soft drinks sold in restaurants, sports arenas, and movie theaters in 2012. However, this initiative was refused by the state's highest court in 2014. 3 For instance, the EU banned battery hens' eggs in 2012 and cosmetic testing on animals in 2013. 4 See, for instance, Besanko et al. (1987, 1988), Crampes and Hollander (1995), and Buehler and Schuett (2014). 5 Note that the argument of economics of scale is less appropriate for mature industries such as the egg market. However, for more emerging industries other than the egg market, marginal cost reductions can naturally occur by economics of scale because of a narrower product assortment. 6 Our demand framework is related to the model used in Allender and Richards (2010a) that considers eggs laid by hens grown under better conditions to be differentiated products as well. We adapt their model to the characteristics of the German egg market and implement order constraints to reflect perceived quality differences of the four different breeding categories instead of having a single demand parameter for the cage-free attribute. On the supply side, we add a structural model representative of the German retail market that we use to quantify evolution of egg prices for different quality tiers after the policy shift. 7 Especially the literature on consumer price indexes deals with this quality bias, as discussed, for instance, in Hausman (2003). 8 See https://www.was-steht-auf-dem-ei.de/en/all-about-eggs/index .php (accessed June 26, 2018). 9 Note that even after 2012, not all member states of the EU, especially among the new eastern member states, have implemented this ban. The EU commission plans to sue these countries for breaching the directive. 10 See https://albert-schweitzer-stiftung.de/aktuell/lidl-ohne-kaefigeier (accessed December 12, 2016). 11 We want to emphasize that only we authors are responsible for the contents, which do not necessarily represent the opinion of the Nielsen Company (Germany) GmbH. 12 See http://www.daserste.de/information/ratgeber-service/ lebensmittelcheck/wie-gut-sind-unsere-eier-fakten-rund-ums-ei-100.html (accessed December 12, 2016). 13 For reasons of confidentiality, all brand and retailer names were made anonymous in this article.

14 Specific brands of eggs are not considered here. We do not regard branding as important because in the data period, most egg brands are private labels and there often exists only one brand within each retailer. The main differentiation here comes through the different egg labels. Furthermore, there is no advertising for egg brands in Germany. 15 For example, Dubé et al. (2010) take any other fresh or canned juice product purchase as an outside good for refrigerated orange juice and any other margarine or butter than considered margarine brands as an outside option for margarine. 16 We construct monthly market shares by using the extrapolated sales for each egg category and compute average prices in euros per 10 eggs by dividing extrapolated revenues by extrapolated sales. 17 We compute monthly net income per adult using the demographic information on households. Income is originally a categorical variable (see Table A.14 in the online appendix for its original coding). We constructed a continuous income variable for each household by drawing from a uniform distribution within the respective income range. 18 Also, after 2008, some retail chains already preempted the ban and start delisting their battery eggs in 2009. 19 Moreover, we observe only purchases of multiple egg packages in 14% of total shopping trips. Because eggs are perishable goods (they should be consumed within approximately two to three weeks), stockpiling is an unreasonable explanation for observing multiple egg package purchases. We therefore treat the decision on the quantity of packages purchased as exogenous and predetermined, for instance, because of household size or because the purchase is for a special occasion. Therefore, each egg purchase occasion at time t represents a discrete choice among Jt egg products independent of quantity. 20 We estimate individual retail chain preferences relative to a baseline chain in order identify the likelihood. For l 1, ^ i,l i,l - i,1 measures household i's preference for the lth retailer relative to the first as the baseline level. 21 The starting date of the season is set to one month before the actual event, like Easter or Christmas. 22 The date of regime change is set to end of June 2010, when the last battery eggs were sold in the major retailers in Germany. 23 We do not think it to be plausible that consumers valued battery eggs more in that process and that retailers' reacted to this as a demand shock by raising prices. In particular, this is implausible, as their market shares also decrease. 24 We note that wholesale prices from the agricultural commodities exchange in Germany are not complete, as there was no access to corresponding prices for organic eggs. 25 This practice can be also found in, for example, Dubois et al. (2018), Allenby et al. (2014), and Allender and Richards (2010a). 26 For example, Table A.5 in the online appendix shows individuallevel inference for a typical household that mainly purchased the lowest-quality alternatives in the unconstrained model to better illustrate this problem. 27 Another example where economically motivated constraints are important is related to the trend in flight ticket pricing, where additional services such as extra luggage, priority boarding, and flexible cancellation rights are extra charges. With market data, we basically never observe that the same flight is offered at a lower price if a customer additionally books extra services. Thus, it will be hard to estimate the willingness to pay for these extra services if one does not include sign constraints reflecting that consumers should weakly prefer such services. 28 Preferences for egg labels will not be affected, as quality-tier assortment is relatively homogeneous across chains.

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

279

29 We run the sampler for R 400,000 iterations and keep every 100th draw. We decided to burn the first 2,000 kept draws after inspecting time series plots of individual-level posterior distributions as well as draws from the posterior of upper-level model parameters. Posterior inference is based on 2,000 draws from the converged posterior distribution. 30 We note that adding seasonality and regime change dummies in our demand specification substantially increases fit; namely, log marginal likelihood is ­538,645.6 based on the best-performing five component model in the simplified demand specification without controls. 31 More specifically, the plot shows choice probabilities of egg alternatives offered by those retailers a household never purchased eggs from based on respective individual posterior mean estimates in the full information choice set at average prices of year 2008. As in Section 6, we focus on package size 10 alternatives, and the representative choice set contains 39 product alternatives because Retailer 1 did not have battery or organic eggs in its assortment in 2008. 32 We do not directly include demographic variables into our demand framework because of the change of variable we use to perform MCMC inference. On the transformed space, the convenient linear relation i zzi + u¯ i is likely misspecified with u¯ i  N(0, V ) and zi being the nz vector of covariates for household i. 33 We considered p-values associated with regression coefficients at every MCMC draw to account for second stage uncertainty. Average p-values (over MCMC draws) and corresponding standard deviations confirmed our results in Table 11. 34 Because there are no prominent national brands for eggs in Germany and retail chains maintain relationships with a fragmented group of egg suppliers, we assume that egg suppliers have no pricing power on the upstream market. Otherwise, we would have to explicitly model the vertical relation between retail chains and egg suppliers. We basically treat retailers' egg products like store brands where the empirical industrial organization literature assumes that these products are priced at marginal costs on the upstream market. See, for instance, "Scenario 2: The Hybrid Model" in Villas-Boas (2007, p. 364). 35 One has to be aware that the composition of the sample used for estimation is not in conflict with the population, for example, that it does not contain too many observations that have almost no weight in the population. This would distort pooling of information by shrinking individual estimates to a sample mean that is not representative of the population. We tested for this problem by reestimating the model based on a sample that is representative for the German population of households; that is, we created a modified sample by drawing from the 6, 961 observations with replacement in line with the projection factors. We concluded that the properties of the posterior distributions implied by the two samples are almost identical. 36 Particularly, we do this because, with the exception of Retailer 1, battery eggs were available everywhere in 2008. 37 If a retail chain offers only a package of six eggs or both package sizes, we compute the average price per egg for a certain category and calculate the effective price for a package of 10 eggs. 38 In the applications that follow below, we use R 100,000 draws from the consumer preference distribution that is implied by the lower-level model (n.s.). 39 For computing equilibrium prices we follow the advice in Morrow and Skerlos (2011) to use the mark-up version of the first-order conditions instead of the literal first-order conditions because the latter approach is not always ensured to deliver reliable results.

40 New equilibrium prices for the counterfactual scenarios are computed by solving the system of nonlinear equations given by firstorder conditions in Equation (9). We use the Gauss­Newton method. The maximum number of iterations is set to 200,000 and the tolerance level to 0.16. Convergence criteria are always achieved. 41 From here on, we drop the adjective "market-share-weighted" for better readability. 42 For example, they could occur if each quality label required firms to invest in marketing and quality assurance management, which do not depend on the number of sales but on the number of offered quality tiers. 43 See https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/Artikel/Industry/regulatory -environment-and-incentives-for-using-electric-vehicles.html (accessed June 26, 2018). 44 See https://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/direct-support/direct-payments_en (accessed June 26, 2018). 45 The term s^barn denotes the sum of market shares for barn eggs across retail chains after imposing the subsidy . 46 Further information on the relationship between pass-through rate and pricing power can be found in recent studies such as Weyl and Fabinger (2013), Fabra and Reguant (2014), and Kim and Cotterill (2008).
References
Allenby GM, Brazell J, Howell J, Rossi PE (2014) Economic valuation of product features. Quant. Marketing Econom. 12(4):421­456.
Allender WJ, Richards TJ (2010a) Consumer impact of animal welfare regulation in the California poultry industry. J. Agricultural Resource Econom. 35(3):424­442.
Allender WJ, Richards TJ (2010b) Market diversion and market power: California eggs. Rev. Indust. Organ. 36(1):37­58.
Andersen L (2011) Animal welfare and eggs--Cheap talk or money on the counter? J. Agricultural Econom. 62(3):565­584.
Besanko D, Donnenfeld S, White LJ (1987) Monopoly and quality distortion: Effects and remedies. Quart. J. Econom. 102(4):743­768.
Besanko D, Donnenfeld S, White LJ (1988) The multiproduct firm, quality choice, and regulation. J. Indust. Econom. 36(4):411­429.
Bockstael NE (1984) The welfare implications of minimum quality standards. Amer. J. Agricultural Econom. 66(4):466­471.
Buehler B, Schuett F (2014) Certification and minimum quality standards when some consumers are uninformed. Eur. Econom. Rev. 70(August):493­511.
Ching AT (2010) A dynamic oligopoly structural model for the prescription drug market after patent expiration. Internat. Econom. Rev. 51(4):1175­1207.
Crampes C, Hollander A (1995) Duopoly and quality standards. Eur. Econom. Rev. 39(1):71­82.
Dubé JP, Hitsch GJ, Rossi PE (2010) State dependence and alternative explanations for consumer inertia. RAND J. Econom. 41(3):417­445.
Dubois P, Griffith R, O'Connell M (2018) The effects of banning advertising in junk food markets. Rev. Econom. Stud. 85(1):396­436.
Erdem T, Keane MP, Sun B (2008) The impact of advertising on consumer price sensitivity in experience goods markets. Quant. Marketing Econom. 6(2):139­176.
Fabra N, Reguant M (2014) Pass-through of emissions costs in electricity markets. Amer. Econom. Rev. 104(9):2872­2899.
Frank RG, Salkever DS (1992) Pricing, patent loss and the market for pharmaceuticals. Southern Econom. J. 59(2):165­179.
Gamerman D, Lopes HF (2006) Markov Chain Monte Carlo: Stochastic Simulation for Bayesian Inference (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL).
Grabowski HG, Vernon JM (1992) Brand loyalty, entry, and price competition in pharmaceuticals after the 1984 drug act. J. Law Econom. 35(2):331­350.

280

Kotschedoff and Pachali: Higher Minimum Quality Standards and Consumer Welfare Marketing Science, 2020, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 253­280, © 2020 INFORMS

Hausman J (2003) Sources of bias and solutions to bias in the consumer price index. J. Econom. Perspect. 17(1):23­44.
Kim D, Cotterill RW (2008) Cost pass-through in differentiated product markets: The case of U.S. processed cheese. J. Indust. Econom. 56(1):32­48.
Lapan H, Moschini G (2007) Grading, minimum quality standards, and the labeling of genetically modified products. Amer. J. Agricultural Econom. 89(3):769­783.
Leland HE (1979) Quacks, lemons, and licensing: A theory of minimum quality standards. J. Political Econom. 87(6):1328­1346.
Malone T, Lusk JL (2016) Putting the chicken before the egg price: An ex post analysis of California's battery cage ban. J. Agricultural Resource Econom. 41(3):518­532.
Morrow WR, Skerlos SJ (2011) Fixed-point approaches to computing Bertrand-Nash equilibrium prices under mixed-logit demand. Oper. Res. 59(2):328­345.
Mullally C, Lusk JL (2018a) The impact of farm animal housing restrictions on egg prices, consumer welfare, and production in California. Amer. J. Agricultural Econom. 100(3):649­669.
Mullally C, Lusk JL (2018b) The impact of farm animal housing restrictions on egg prices, consumer welfare, and production in California--Authors' response to comment. Amer. J. Agricultural Econom. 100(3):674­675.
Mussa M, Rosen S (1978) Monopoly and product quality. J. Econom. Theory 18(2):301­317.
Nevo A (2001) Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry. Econometrica 69(2):307­342.
Norwood FB (2011) The private provision of animal-friendly eggs and pork. Amer. J. Agricultural Econom. 94(2):509­514.
Norwood FB, Lusk JL (2009) The farm animal welfare debate. Choices 24(3), http://www.choicesmagazine.org/UserFiles/ file/article_89.pdf.
Norwood FB, Lusk JL (2011) A calibrated auction-conjoint valuation method: Valuing pork and eggs produced under differing animal welfare conditions. J. Environmental Econom. Management 62(1):80­94.
Pachali MJ, Kurz P, Otter T (2018) How to generalize from a hierarchical model? Working paper, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.

Panzar JC, Savage I (2011) Does a minimum quality standard always reduce the price of high quality products? B.E. J. Econom. Anal. Policy 11(1):1­30.
Perloff JM, Salop SC (1985) Equilibrium with product differentiation. Rev. Econom. Stud. 52(1):107­120.
Reiss PC, Wolak FA (2007) Structural econometric modeling: Rationales and examples from industrial organization. Heckman JJ, Leamer EE, eds. Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 6 (Elsevier, Amsterdam), 4277­4415.
Rossi PE, Allenby GM, McCulloch R (2005) Bayesian Statistics and Marketing (John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ).
Ryan SP (2012) The costs of environmental regulation in a concentrated industry. Econometrica 80(3):1019­1061.
Shapiro C (1983) Premiums for high quality products as returns to reputations. Quart. J. Econom. 98(4):659­679.
Small KA, Rosen HS (1981) Applied welfare economics with discrete choice models. Econometrica 49(1):105­130.
Sudhir K (2001) Structural analysis of manufacturer pricing in the presence of a strategic retailer. Marketing Sci. 20(3):244­264.
Sumner DA (2018) Comment on the impact of farm animal housing restrictions on egg prices, consumer welfare, and production in California. Amer. J. Agricultural Econom. 100(3):670­673.
Sumner DA, Rosen-Molina JT, Matthews WA, Mench JA, Richter KR (2008) Economic effects of proposed restrictions on egg-laying hen housing in California. Report, Agricultural Issues Center, University of California, Davis.
Train KE (2009) Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK).
Villas-Boas SB (2007) Vertical relationships between manufacturers and retailers: Inference with limited data. Rev. Econom. Stud. 74(2):625­652.
Ward MB, Shimshack JP, Perloff JM, Harris MJ (2002) Effects of the private-label invasion in food industries. Amer. J. Agricultural Econom. 84(4):961­973.
Weyl EG, Fabinger M (2013) Pass-through as an economic tool: Principles of incidence under imperfect competition. J. Political Econom. 121(3):528­583.
Zander K, Feucht Y (2018) Consumers' willingness to pay for sustainable seafood made in Europe. J. Internat. Food Agribusiness Marketing 30(3):251­275.

