Vol. 27, No. 3, May­June 2008, pp. 513­530 issn 0732-2399 eissn 1526-548X 08 2703 0513

informs ®
doi 10.1287/mksc.1070.0312 © 2008 INFORMS

Research Note
Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market
Chuan He
Leeds School of Business, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, chuan.he@colorado.edu
Johan Marklund
Department of Industrial Management and Logistics, Lund University, SE-22100 Lund, Sweden, johan.marklund@iml.lth.se
Thomas Vossen
Leeds School of Business, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, thomas.vossen@colorado.edu
When demand is uncertain, manufacturers and retailers often have private information on future demand, and such information asymmetry impacts strategic interaction in distribution channels. In this paper, we investigate a channel consisting of a manufacturer and a downstream retailer facing a product market characterized by short product life, uncertain demand, and price rigidity. Assuming the firms have asymmetric information about the demand volatility, we examine the potential benefits of sharing information and contracts that facilitate such cooperation. We conclude that under a wholesale price regime, information sharing might not improve channel profits when the retailer underestimates the demand volatility but the manufacturer does not. Although information sharing is always beneficial under a two-part tariff regime, it is in general not sufficient to achieve sharing, and additional contractual arrangements are necessary. The contract types we consider to facilitate sharing are profit sharing and buyback contracts.
Key words: channels of distribution; decisions under uncertainty; game theory; supply chains History: This paper was received September 22, 2005, and was with the authors 13 months for 2 revisions.

1. Introduction
Demand uncertainty is ubiquitous in essentially any marketplace. Understanding it is one of the constant challenges firms face on the road toward success, and failure to do so often has devastating effects on the bottom line. In many product categories, ranging from fashion apparel and fresh produce to movie rentals, matching supply and demand is complicated by the large and increasing volatilities in demand. Even when firms have a relatively clear picture of the average demand, the level of uncertainty will have a significant impact on firms' decisions. Some of the numerous factors that influence the volatility of demand are weather, opinion leaders' attitudes, popularity of competing products, etc. Put differently, there is a range of possibilities surrounding the average demand so that the actual demand realization can be either higher or lower than the average demand. Thus, the range of the actual demand realization is impacted by so many different factors beyond the firms' control that the only appropriate notion is that it is determined by nature.
In distribution channels, information asymmetry across channel members with respect to demand uncertainty further complicates matters. In industries

ranging from grocery to aerospace, manufacturers and retailers often make independent demand estimates with different degrees of accuracy. Many factors, such as the proximity to consumers, the availability and quality of customer databases, sophistication of decision support tools, and experience, contribute to the accuracy of the demand estimate. We motivate the core issue of this paper in the context of a distribution channel of fashion apparel. Before the season begins, the retailer needs to negotiate purchasing prices and place an order with the manufacturer. The retailer knows that if she orders too late (say, after the season begins), she will forgo sales. At this point, the only information available is the demand estimates (private information) of the manufacturer and the retailer and each party's profile (public information). However, neither the manufacturer nor the retailer knows the other party's estimate unless it is purposely revealed. Is there any value in sharing the two parties' demand estimates? If the answer is yes, what mechanism(s) can help accomplish information sharing?
There is ample evidence that members of a distribution channel can greatly benefit by sharing demand information. According to an A. T. Kearney report

513

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

514

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

(Field 2005), the average manufacturer has enjoyed benefits equivalent to $1 million in savings for every $1 billion of sales by synchronizing their demand databases with their retailers. However, it is not clear that information sharing is always feasible in decentralized channels because it is marred by incentive and credibility problems. For example, in the PC industry, manufacturers often suspect their distributors of submitting "phantom orders," i.e., forecasts of high future demand that do not materialize (Zarley and Damore 1996). Hence, the value of information sharing and the mechanisms for facilitating information sharing are topics of great managerial importance and have received considerable attention in the literature (e.g., Amaldoss and Rapoport 2005; Cachon and Fisher 2000; Cachon and Lariviere 2001; Chen 2003; Gal-Or 1986; Gu and Chen 2005; Kulp et al. 2004; Lee et al. 1997, 2000; Li 2002, 2005; Niraj and Narasimhan 2002; Villas-Boas 1994; Vives 1984).
In this paper, we focus on a product market characterized by short product life, uncertain demand, and price rigidity (lack of price promotion). A catalogue marketer of fashion goods is a prototypical example of such a market. Because of the inherent uncertainty about consumer tastes, fashion goods are synonymous with rapid change and subject to significant demand variability. We investigate a distribution channel with one manufacturer and one retailer, each with private information about the distribution of future demand. More precisely, we consider multiplicative demand uncertainty, uniformly distributed between an upper and a lower bound about which the members of the channel have asymmetric information. To capture the impact of uncertainty, we model the retailer as a newsvendor problem with endogenous pricing. This allows us to balance the expected cost of ordering too much with the expected opportunity cost of ordering too little, when maximizing the retailer profits. The manufacturer is assumed to operate under a constant marginal cost, without any capacity constraints.
Our objective is to examine the benefits of sharing information about future demand volatility and contracts that facilitate such cooperation. To facilitate our analysis, we make a few important assumptions. First, we assume that firms cannot refine their demand estimates by using historical data. Second, we assume that the correlation between the firms' demand estimates is unknown, and therefore there is no obvious way to combine or pool them into a more accurate estimate. Thus, we can view the environment under consideration as a one-shot, highly volatile setting, where firms engage in short-term relationships. We note that, unlike a long-term relationship where reputation can support truthful information revelation,

in a short-term relationship incentive and credibility problems are far more prevalent.
Within the resulting framework, we find that sharing information about market demand volatility does not always improve channel profits. In particular, under a wholesale-price-only regime, when the retailer underestimates the demand variability but the manufacturer does not, sharing can lead to lower channel profits. In addition, we show that the feasibility of information sharing depends not only on the asymmetric estimates of the demand volatility, but also on the channel members' knowledge of the quality of each member's demand estimate. Specifically, we demonstrate that a profit-sharing contract is a viable mechanism when each channel member is aware of the quality of the other member's demand estimate relative to its own, whereas buyback contracts can improve channel coordination when only one member knows whose demand estimate is more accurate.
We also find that under a two-part tariff regime, although sharing information about market demand volatility always improves channel profits, additional contractual arrangements are needed for sharing to occur. In contrast to the symmetric case, under asymmetric information about demand volatility, a twopart tariff does not always coordinate the channel.
Three streams of literature are relevant to our study: the literature on channel coordination, the literature on newsvendor models with endogenous pricing decisions, and the emerging literature on information sharing. Next, we briefly review this literature and relate it to our current work. The extant channel literature generally assumes deterministic demand (e.g., Jeuland and Shugan 1983, McGuire and Staelin 1983, Coughlan 1985). The limited channel literature that incorporates demand uncertainty usually assumes that uncertainty is a white noise and has no consequence as firms maximize expected profits (e.g., Lal 1990), or models uncertainty as consisting of a high state and a low state (e.g., Biyalogorsky and Koenigsberg 2004, Desai 2000, Padmanabhan and Png 1997, Gu and Chen 2005). As opposed to our work, which focuses on the impact of asymmetric information about demand volatility, these papers primarily consider the impact of uncertainty in the demand level (i.e., the mean). Such treatment allows researchers to obtain a high level of parsimony, which facilitates the analysis of complex issues such as channel structure, upstream/downstream competition, multiperiod interaction, etc. However, this parsimony is obtained at the cost of generality. In particular, the actual demand realization may be either above or below the average, and firms incur costs in either case. By focusing on demand average but ignoring volatility, one assumes that the

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

515

costs associated with undershooting and overshooting are identical (we shall revisit this point in §3.3), which might significantly distort firms' decisions when demand volatility is large. We complement this literature by looking at demand uncertainty from a different perspective, focusing on the impact of asymmetric estimates of the demand volatility in a newsvendor setting with uniformly distributed demand uncertainty.
The classical newsvendor approach offers an intuitive way to incorporate the effect of demand volatility into the analysis of channel behavior. In a one-period setting, the retailer (newsvendor) trades off the marginal cost of understocking with that of overstocking when determining how much to order. In its traditional formulation, the newsvendor model determines the quantity to order under the assumption that price is an exogenously set parameter that does not affect demand.1 The impact of adding pricing decisions to the newsvendor problem was first considered by Whitin (1955). Mills (1959) considers this problem under the assumption of additive demand uncertainty, whereas Karlin and Carr (1962) assume multiplicative demand uncertainty. For a comprehensive review of the newsvendor problem with endogenous pricing, we refer to Petruzzi and Dada (1999), who propose a unified view of the abovementioned approaches.
From an information-sharing perspective, it is well known that demand uncertainty and the use of local demand information often lead to severe distortion and loss of channel profits. A related issue is the inherent amplification of demand variability as local demand information is transmitted along a distribution channel. The phenomenon, which stems from successive distortion of the demand information, is often referred to as the bullwhip effect. It was first illustrated in Forrester (1958) and more recently analyzed by Lee et al. (1997), the latter spawning a large number of publications on this issue, for which one remedy is information sharing.
Lee et al. (2000) study information sharing in supply chains with long-term relationships and find that the value of information sharing is high when the demand correlation over time is high and when the demand variance within each time period is high. However, information sharing is complicated by incentive and credibility problems that arise from information asymmetry. Cachon and Lariviere (2001) explore capacity decisions in a supply chain with one manufacturer and one supplier (retailer). They show that the use of forcing contracts (involuntary compliance) versus self-enforcing contracts (voluntary
1 See Porteus (1990) for a comprehensive review of general newsvendor problems.

compliance) has a significant impact on the outcome of demand forecast sharing. Li (2002) examines the incentives for firms to share information vertically in a supply chain with one manufacturer and many retailers. He shows that voluntary information sharing is often infeasible when the retailers are engaged in a Cournot competition and are endowed with some private information. For excellent reviews of information sharing and contracts in supply chain coordination, readers are referred to Chen (2003) and Cachon (2003).
Our paper differs from the abovementioned literature in two aspects. First, we study the value of information sharing in a distribution channel in which the members have asymmetric information about demand volatility. Second, we examine the mechanisms for facilitating information sharing in the context of short-term relationships, where cooperative behavior is rare and forcing contracts of any kind are difficult to implement.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the key elements of the model. Section 3 analyzes the basic model, in which a manufacturer and a retailer operate under a wholesaleprice-only regime without sharing information about demand volatility. The model is analyzed for the cases of symmetric and asymmetric information. Section 4 explores the value of sharing this type of information, and how to facilitate sharing using different contractual agreements. Section 5 considers the impact of sharing information under a two-part tariff regime instead of a wholesale price mechanism. In §6, we conclude with some overall thoughts on this research, its limitations, and possible directions for future research. Discussions of proofs of propositions are given in the regular appendix, whereas the proofs of lemmas are deferred to the technical appendix.
2. Assumptions and Model Setup
The distribution channel we consider consists of a manufacturer and a downstream retailer; both firms are risk neutral and maximize their expected profits. Given that p represents the retail price, end-customer demand is given by D p = y p , where y p = ap-b (defined for a > 0 b > 1) is a price-dependent deterministic function, and is a uniformly distributed random variable with mean of 1. More precisely,  U 1 - L 1 + L for 0  L  1, with f and F denoting its pdf and cdf. Hence, end-customer demand is determined by a random draw from the distribution U 1 - L 1 + L , where nature determines the extent of uncertainty L. The demand is intrinsically stochastic with an average of y p , a standard deviation of y p L/ 3, and a volatility that decreases (increases) as L tends to zero (one). It follows that the average

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

516

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

demand y p tends to zero as p grows very large and goes to infinity as p approaches zero. This property is innocuous and is equivalent to the usual assumption that the demand reaches the market potential (usually a constant) when the product is free. Parameter b measures price sensitivity. We assume that the price elasticity of the average demand b is common knowledge and that b > 1 so that the demand is sufficiently elastic.
From this model description it is clear that the random variable captures the demand uncertainty. We assume that the functional form of its distribution (uniform) and its mean are common knowledge. The only unknown is the variance of , which is characterized by the lower and upper bounds of the distribution 1 - L and 1 + L. Because L is determined by nature, neither the manufacturer nor the retailer knows its exact value, but they can develop independent estimates of L based on their private market information. We denote the manufacturer's estimate of L by Lm and the retailer's estimate by Lr . These estimates determine the random variables m and
r , which represent the manufacturer's and retailer's asymmetric information about demand uncertainty . Clearly, the distributions of m and r are dependent on the characterization of Lm and Lr .
Next we provide a general overview of the steps in our model. First, the manufacturer determines the wholesale price w. We assume that the manufacturer has a constant marginal cost c and does not have any capacity constraints. Subsequently, the retailer, with the wholesale price w at hand, sets the retail price, p, and places an order, q. Finally, the demand D p is realized. If D p > q, the retailer experiences a shortage and incurs an opportunity cost in terms of profits lost, p - w D p - q ; if D p < q, the retailer has leftover products over which it incurs a loss, w q - D p . We assume that neither the retailer nor the manufacturer incurs any goodwill cost in the event of shortage, and that any leftover products have zero salvage value. It would be possible, however, to extend our model to incorporate these features.
The resulting framework can be viewed as a oneperiod game of incomplete information, and the appropriate solution concept in this setting would be the Bayesian-Nash equilibrium. Specifically, the firms' optimal strategies need to be consistent with their beliefs derived from Bayes rule. To allow for an analysis of their strategies within this framework, however, we make two critical assumptions.
First, we assume that Lm and Lr are single-valued point estimates of L. This implies that the firms' beliefs m and r are uniformly distributed, because it is common knowledge that is uniform. As a result, we have that m  U 1 - Lm 1 + Lm for 0  Lm  1, and r  U 1 - Lr 1 + Lr for 0  Lr  1. It is important

to acknowledge that this assumption limits the generality of our approach by not recognizing that firms might be uncertain about the quality of their estimate of L. A more inclusive method would be to explicitly treat Lm and Lr as stochastic variables; as a result, the firms' beliefs m and r would be characterized by integrals of uniform distributions. Although such a representation could admit a high level of generality in belief updating, the resulting analysis would be considerably more complex. Thus, we choose to sacrifice generality for tractability in our quest to examine the nature of information sharing about future demand volatility.
Similarly, we also assume that the correlation between the firms' demand estimates is unknown, and therefore there is no obvious way to combine or pool them into a more accurate estimate. As a result, the firms will use their own estimates. This follows because the manufacturer's wholesale price w is uninformative and the retailer's estimate has no impact on the manufacturer's decision. As we will discuss in §3, in our model the optimal wholesale price w is independent of Lm because the manufacturer's marginal cost is constant and there is no capacity constraint. This ensures that the retailer cannot extract any information about the manufacturer's estimate through the wholesale price w. The manufacturer, on the other hand, may deduce the retailer estimate Lr . This, however, does not affect the optimal wholesale price (again, this is shown in §3), and the equilibrium solution will remain unchanged. Without information sharing, it is therefore rational for the manufacturer and the retailer to use their own estimate. By the same token, with information sharing a firm will use the other party's estimate provided that the information is credible and doing so is incentive compatible. As with the distributional assumption of Li, the unknown correlation assumption limits the scope of our analysis. Nevertheless, we believe that it yields valuable insights in one-shot game settings with short-term relations, where historical information is of limited use and belief updating is less applicable.
Given the model setup outlined above, suppose that the manufacturer and the retailer each form their point estimates Lm and Lr of L? As explained, their beliefs on are then given by m  U 1 - Lm 1 + Lm and r  U 1 - Lr 1 + Lr , respectively. Without information sharing, the manufacturer will use its private demand estimate, m, to predict the retailer's reaction. Moreover, the retailer sets the retail price and places an order using its own demand estimate r . It is possible, however, that Li  L or Li  L, where i = r m. In other words, the manufacturer and the retailer can either overestimate or underestimate L. Because the mean of the demand distribution is known, we say

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

517

Figure 1 Game Tree

Nature

L

0

1

M

R

IS Lm = Lr = L*
No IS

R accepts

i = h j = l

R rejects

M offers IS contract
m = l, r = 

Lm, m

See Table 1

Lr, r

m = h, r = 

m = , r = l

i = j = 
No IS m = , r = h

M offers IS contract

R accepts

R rejects

IS Lm = Lr

IS Lm = Lr

R offers IS contract

M accepts

M rejects

IS Lr = Lm

No IS

IS Lr = Lm

No IS

that a firm's demand estimate is superior if its estimated variance is closer to the true state. According to our definition, Li is superior to Lj if L - Li < L - Lj . At the same time that the firms form their beliefs on L, the manufacturer and the retailer each receive a signal that reveals the type of the other player with respect to the relative quality of its demand estimate. For simplicity, we assume that each player can be of three types h l , where type h has a demand estimate of superior quality, type has the same quality as the other player or the quality is unknown, and type l has inferior quality. In sum, the information set of each player is given by Li i (see Figure 1).
Although information about the firm's own demand volatility estimate (Lm or Lr ) is always private, information about which estimate is superior (if it exists) can be either private or common knowledge. Put differently, a firm's demand estimate is known only to itself, but the quality of this estimate might be known to the other firm. For example, when forecasting the sales of a new novel, a national book store such as Amazon might have a demand estimate of n ± x units, whereas a regional publisher's demand estimate is n ± y units. This information is strictly private

unless purposely revealed. On average, one would

expect Amazon's estimate to be superior because

of its sophisticated CRM (customer relationship

management) solutions and national presence (thus

r = l m = h). However, the regional publisher can generate a superior estimate through proprietary mar-

keting research (this may or may not be known to

Amazon; thus, r = h or

m = l). If the regional

publisher deals with a local bookstore that has mar-

keting capability similar to its own, this dictates that

the manufacturer is of type and vice versa, etc.

Note that the cases where r = m = l, r = m = h are equivalent to r = m = . In these cases, the credibility problem cannot be resolved, and hence

information sharing cannot occur. We summarize the

alternative information structures in Table 1. These

information structures reflect all the possible states

of the world (12 permutations). Note that one can

embed a more elaborate signal-generating process for

each information structure. We abstract from such

processes and focus on whether information sharing

can occur under each of these states of the world,

under what conditions, and how information sharing

can be accomplished.

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

518

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

Table 1 Alternative Information Structures

Whose estimate of demand volatility is superior

Firm's knowledge of the quality of the demand estimate

Only M knows

Only R knows

Neither firm knows

Both firms know

M

Scenario 1a

Scenario 2a

Quality is common

m=l r =

m= r =h

Scenario 3

knowledge

R

Scenario 1b

Scenario 2b

i= j=

i =h

m=h r =

m= r =l

j =l

When the quality of the demand estimates is private information, there are three possible scenarios (see Table 1): (1) the manufacturer knows whose estimate is superior but the retailer does not, (2) the retailer knows whose information is superior but the manufacturer does not, and (3) neither firm knows who has a better demand estimate. As we shall see, these alternative information structures generate various incentive and credibility issues and hence impact the feasibility of information sharing. To better understand the incentive and credibility problems in information sharing, we outline the taxonomy of alternative information structures, summarized in Table 1. We discuss each of these scenarios in turn.
In Scenario 1 only the manufacturer knows which estimate is superior. If the manufacturer's estimate is superior (Scenario 1a), he needs to credibly convey this information to the retailer when doing so improves his profit. The incentive problem arises because the manufacturer wants to share his better information only if the retailer's order quantity is too low and hence hurts his profit. However, the manufacturer might also have an incentive to induce the retailer to order too much. Thus, the credibility problem also arises because the retailer does not know whose estimate is superior and would suffer from a lower profit if he orders too much. If the retailer's estimate is superior (Scenario 1b), no action is necessary. The manufacturer simply complies with the retailer's order and the retailer's information is transferred to the manufacturer costlessly. Neither credibility nor incentive problems are present because the retailer has no incentive to manipulate the order quantity, given his lack of knowledge on whose demand estimate is superior. In Scenario 2, where only the retailer knows which estimate is superior, credibility and incentive problems arise when the manufacturer possesses a better demand estimate (Scenario 2a), but no action is necessary if the retailer's demand estimate is superior (Scenario 2b). The underlying logic is similar to that discussed in Scenario 1. In Scenario 3, it is not clear that information sharing is at all feasible. In sum, the game unfolds as follows (see Figure 1). In Scenario 3 r = m = , no information sharing (IS) occurs. In Scenarios 1b and 2b ( m = h,
r = and m = , r = l), the manufacturer updates

its demand estimate to the retailer's (Lm = Lr ) without the need of information-sharing contract. In Scenario 1a, the manufacturer must offer a contract to induce the retailer to engage in information sharing. If the retailer accepts, the retailer updates its demand estimate to the manufacturer's (Lr = Lm); otherwise, no information sharing occurs. In Scenario 2a, the roles of the manufacturer and the retailer switch.2 Finally, when the quality of the demand estimates is common knowledge, the manufacturer and retailer may negotiate an information-sharing contract. If successful, information sharing occurs and the party whose demand estimate is inferior updates to the superior one (Lm = Lr = L).
3. The Basic Model
The basic model examined in this section focuses on situations where the manufacturer and the retailer interact using a wholesale-price-only regime. Situations in which the manufacturer and the retailer interact using a two-part tariff mechanism are analyzed in §5. The wholesale-price-only contract implies that the only interaction between the retailer and the manufacturer occurs when the manufacturer posts its wholesale price and when the retailer places its order. Our basic model considers the impact of demand volatility and asymmetric information in situations where information sharing does not occur. As such, the results obtained here serve as the basis for analyzing the value and feasibility of information sharing in §4.
To analyze the framework and determine the equilibrium decisions, we use backward induction. To illustrate the impact of demand volatility, we first consider the case in which both the retailer and the manufacturer have symmetric and accurate information, that is, Lr = Lm = L. Section 3.1 derives the retailer's profit-maximizing strategy for this case, given the wholesale price determined by the manufacturer. Based on these results, the manufacturer's decision problem is analyzed in §3.2. Subsequently, §3.3 provides insights as to the impact of demand
2 We consider only Scenario 1a and the common knowledge case in subsequent analysis.

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

519

volatility on the equilibrium strategies. Finally, §3.4 discusses the impact of information asymmetry on the equilibrium strategies. Although §§3.1 and 3.2 are integral components of our analysis, they focus on the technical aspects of the model and are relatively self-contained. Readers who are not interested in the underlying mathematics of the model development can go directly to §§3.3 and 3.4 for key insights from the model.

3.1. Symmetric Information: Retailer

Profit-Maximizing Strategy

The retailer profit for the period, r , is the difference between its sales revenues and purchase costs.

Assuming a wholesale price w, a retail price p, an

order quantity q, and the demand D p , r can be expressed as follows:

 pD p - wq for D p  q

r q p w = p-w q

(1) for D p > q

Following the approach outlined, for example, in Petruzzi and Dada (1999), we express all quantities relative to the deterministic price-dependent component y p by defining what we refer to as the meanadjusted order quantity z = q/y p . This results in an alternative mean-adjusted representation, which clarifies the impact of demand uncertainty and simplifies the analysis to come

rzpw 

 p-w -w z-

for  z

=y p · p-w - p-w

-z

(2) for > z

The expected profit that the retailer attempts to maximize when deciding p and z (or equivalently q) is given in (3) below (recall that Lr = L)

E rzpw

1+L

z

=y p

p - w xf x dx - w z - x f x dx

1-L

1-L

1+L

- p-w

x - z f x dx

(3)

z

Defining p w = y p p - w and

z
z p w = y p w z - x f x dx
1-L

1+L

+ p-w

x - z f x dx

z

= y p LpF 2 z + p - w 1 - z

we can also write

E rzpw = pw- zpw

(4)

Hence, the expected profit can be expressed as the riskless profit, p w , which represents the profit obtained by the retailer in the deterministic problem (e.g., L = 0), less the expected loss that results from the presence of uncertainty, expressed by the loss function z p w . Note that the expected loss equals the sum of the expected cost of ordering too much and the expected opportunity cost of ordering too little.
To determine the optimal price pr w and meanadjusted order quantity zr w that maximize (3) and (4) for a given w, we consider the first-order optimality conditions

E r z p w =- z

zpw z

= y p p - w - pF z = 0

E rzpw p

=y p

z 1-bp-w p

+ b - 1 LF 2 z

=0

Note that for any given p the optimal mean-adjusted
order quantity zr p w corresponds to the standard newsvendor result, that is,

zr p w = F -1

p-w p

= 1 - L + 2L p - w p

(5)

It is easy to see from (5) that zr p w is increasing in p for any given w. Intuitively, the explanation for
this is that the opportunity cost for every unsatisfied
demand p - w increases with p, whereas the cost of
every surplus item remains constant at w.
Similarly, for any given z we can use the first-order
optimality conditions to determine the optimal price pr z w

pr z w = w

b b-1

z z - LF 2 z

(6)

Note that whenever demand is deterministic (e.g., L = 0), the optimal riskless price pr w = w b/ b - 1 . Comparing with (6), we note that z - LF 2 z <
z because both L and F z are nonnegative. Using
the definition of F z , we can also conclude that z - LF 2 z > 0 because L  1 and F 2 z  F z  z.
Thus, Equation (6) illustrates the well-known result
(Karlin and Carr 1962) that the introduction of uncer-
tainty will yield a price that is larger than the optimal riskless price, i.e., pr w  w b/ b - 1 .
Using (5) (or (6)), the retailer's profit maximization
problem can be reduced to an optimization problem
over a single variable. Substituting the expression for zr p w into the expected profit function (4) renders the expression

E

r zr p w p w = y p

p-w 1-Lw p

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

520

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

which is decreasing in the demand volatility L. Using

the first-order optimality condition with respect to p renders pr w as specified in Lemma 1.

Lemma 1. For any given w, the optimal retail price is

obtained as

pr

w

=

w

b

b -

1

H

b

L

(7)

where

1+L

1-L 2 L

Hb L= 2 +

2

+ b2 > 1

(8)

Note that b/ b - 1 H b L can be viewed as a generalized double-marginalization factor, which is minimized for the special case of deterministic demand (i.e., L = 0) where it degenerates to b/ b - 1 . From Lemma 1 it is easy to determine the optimal meanadjusted order quantity zr w by substituting pr w for p in (5)

zr w

= F -1

1

-

b bH

- b

1 L

= 1 - L + 2L

1

-

b bH

- b

1 L

(9)

The corresponding actual order quantity, qr w , follows directly as qr w = zr w y pr w .

3.2. Symmetric Information: Manufacturer Profit-Maximizing Strategy
The manufacturer has to determine an optimal wholesale price wm . Given that, in the current case, the retailer and manufacturer have symmetric and accurate information (Lr = Lm = L), the manufacturer can accurately predict the retailer's response to any given order quantity he chooses. Consequently, the manufacturer's profit function, as a function of the wholesale price, can be expressed as

m w = w - c qr pr w w = w - c 1 + L - 2L b - 1 1 b Hb L

·

b

Hb L

-b
yw

(10)

b-1

Note that m w is a deterministic function, that is, the manufacturer's profit is determined by how much
the retailer orders instead of actual sales during the
period. This implies that the manufacturer does not
expose itself to any risk associated with demand
uncertainty. To determine the manufacturer's optimal wholesale price wm , we use the first-order optimality condition for m w with respect to w,

m w = 1 - b w - c 1 + L - 2L b - 1

w

w

bH b L

·

b

Hb L

-b
y w =0

b-1

Solving for w yields

wm

=

b

b -

1

c

(11)

Note that wm is independent of the demand volatility L.3 We also note that in the case of deterministic demand (L = 0), (11) together with (6) illustrates the well-known double-marginalization principle.

3.3. Symmetric Information: Impact of Demand Volatility
From the above, we conclude that the profit-maximizing strategy for the manufacturer is to set a wholesale price wm , and the optimal response for the retailer is to order qr wm units which are sold at a retail price of pr wm . To analyze the value of information sharing, an important question is how changes in the demand volatility estimates impact these decisions and the associated profits. In the remainder of this section we provide some structural properties that help answer these questions. First, however, we note that because the manufacturer's optimal wholesale price wm is independent of L (see (11)), its profitmaximizing strategy is unaffected by changes in the demand volatility. We therefore concentrate on how changes in demand volatility impact the retailer's optimal strategy.
Starting with a comparison to the deterministic case, we conclude that in the presence of demand volatility, the order quantity generally differs from the average demand. The reason is the differences in the costs associated with understocking and overstocking.
Lemma 2. For any given L, qr w > y pr w if and only if H b L > 2 b - 1 /b .
This is illustrated in Figure 2, which shows both the mean-adjusted and the actual order quantity as a function of L. Clearly, qr w = y pr w when L = 0. However, as L increases z w will initially decrease below one (and therefore qr w < y pr w ), until we reach the value of L for which H b L = 2 b - 1 /b . For larger values of L, z w will be larger than 1. Similarly, we can conclude that the retail price pr w generally differs from the optimal riskless price pr w = w b/ b - 1 . The explanation in this case is that the retailer, ex ante, can use the retail price to fine-tune the expected costs of overstocking and understocking.
As discussed in the introduction of this paper, the conventional approach to model demand uncertainty in the channel literature focuses on the mean but fails

3 It is worth pointing out that this is unlikely to hold if the manufacturer faces constrained capacity, which typically creates a complex relationship between c and the quantity ordered. As shown in Ray et al. (2006), changes in c could lead to asymmetric wholesale prices.

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

521

Figure 2 z

Impact of Demand Volatility on Order Quantity q*

1 y( p*)

L

L

0

10

1

to explicitly account for additional trade-offs caused by the introduction of demand volatility, such as those discussed above. This could become problematic when demand volatility is an important factor. We note that although a two-point distribution can also account for the effect of demand volatility, it is difficult to disentangle the effect of the mean from that of variance in such distributions, because change in the variance will generally lead to a change in the mean, unless the two points change symmetrically.
Turning to the impact that demand volatility has on the retailer's strategy, Lemma 3 specifies how changes in L affect the optimal retail price.
Lemma 3. The profit-maximizing retail price pr w is strictly increasing in L.
Intuitively, by increasing the retail price, the retailer can reduce the demand variability (recall that its standard deviation is y p L/ 3 and that y p is decreasing in p) and counter the effect of an increase in L on the loss term z p w . Of course, an increase in the retail price also reduces the mean demand, y p , which implies a reduction in the riskless profit p w .
Similarly, Lemma 4 specifies how changes in L affect the retailer's optimal order quantity qr w .
Lemma 4. The profit-maximizing order quantity qr w is strictly decreasing in L.
Intuitively, Lemma 4 is based on the fact that, although the mean-adjusted order quantity zr p w is increasing in p, the actual order quantity qr p w = y p zr p w will have a maximum. This is because any increase in zr p w is countered by a decrease in the mean demand y p = ap-b as p increases. The lemma follows because we can show that the optimal profit-maximizing retail price pr w is always strictly greater than the price for which the order quantity is maximized.
3.4. Impact of Information Asymmetry Let us now consider the situation in which the retailer and the manufacturer have asymmetric demand estimates, which may both be different from the true demand volatility L. Thus, the retailer's estimate Lr may be different from the manufacturer's estimate Lm.

In this case, the basic model is again derived

from backward induction. However, when the retailer

makes its decisions about retail price and order quan-

tity to maximize its expected profits (given w), it does

so ex ante without knowing D p . Instead, it has to

rely on its best demand estimate Dr p . The associated profit function, and consequently the expected

profit, are equivalent to (2) and (3) after substitut-

ing Dr p for D p and r for , respectively. In the asymmetric case, the optimal retail price is given

by pr w = w b/ b - 1 H b Lr , whereas the optimal mean-adjusted order quantity zr w = 1 - Lr + 2Lr 1 - b - 1 /bH b Lr . In §3.2, we showed that
the manufacturer's optimal strategy is in fact inde-

pendent of its demand estimate. Thus, even with

asymmetric information the optimal wholesale price

wm = b/ b - 1 c. To analyze the impact of information asymmetry,

we first observe that Lemmas 3 and 4 imply that

whenever the retailer underestimates demand volatil-

ity, the result will be a retail price that is too low

and an order quantity that is too high. Conversely, if

the retailer overestimates the demand volatility, the

retail price will be too high and the order quantity too

low. The impact on channel profits, however, is some-

what more complicated. After the profit-maximizing

strategies wm qr wm and pr wm ) are revealed, the manufacturer's profit, m wm = wm - c · qr wm , is unambiguously defined. Note that m wm depends on Lr via qr wm , but that it is independent of L and Lm. The retailer's expected profit, on
the other hand, is a bit more ambiguous. From the

retailer's perspective, the demand estimate, r , is correct. Under this demand estimate, its perceived

expected profit ex ante is E r

r zr wm pr wm wm

as defined in (3) and (4). However, objectively, the true

demand uncertainty is (unknown to the retailer).

Under the true demand distribution the retailer's

actual expected profit is E r zr wm pr wm wm . In analogy with (4), we have

E r zr wm pr wm wm = pr wm wm - zr wm pr wm wm

(12)

where

GL z

z p w =y p w

z - x f x dx

1-L

1+L

+ p-w

x -z f x dx (13)

GL z

and



1 - L if z < 1 - L

G L z = z1 + L

if 1 - L  z  1 + L if z > 1 + L

(14)

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

522

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

Clearly, if the retailer's estimate is correct, i.e., r = and Lr = L, the retailer's perceived expected profit coincides with its actual expected profit.

Proposition 1. Under the equilibrium strategies wm ,

qr wm , and pr wm :

1. The manufacturer's profit, m wm and the retailer's

perceived expected profit, E r

r zr wm pr wm wm , are

decreasing in Lr .

2. The retailer's actual expected profit, E r zr wm

pr wm wm , is maximized when the retailer's estimate of

the demand distribution is correct, i.e., when Lr = L.

3. When the retailer's demand estimate is correct

Lr = L , the retailer's actual expected profit is decreasing in the demand volatility L.

Given the assumptions underlying our framework, we conclude that if the retailer overestimates the demand volatility Lr > L , it has a negative impact on the profits of both the retailer and the manufacturer. On the other hand, an underestimation Lr < L , will benefit the manufacturer. Proposition 1 also asserts that increased volatility, even when correctly estimated, reduces profits of both the retailer and manufacturer. The implications of this proposition on the potential benefits for the channel to share information about demand volatility are further discussed in §4.

4. Information Sharing in a Wholesale-Price-Only Regime
For information sharing to occur within our model setup, at least one firm should be able to evaluate the expected improvement in profits when sharing occurs. Such judgment, however, cannot be made if neither firm knows whose demand estimate is the most accurate (or superior as we have deemed it). Specifically, information sharing is feasible when at least one firm knows the quality of the demand estimates and when the firms can overcome the incentive and credibility problems. In the information-sharing scenarios we outlined in §2, each firm knows its own estimate of demand volatility (Lm or Lr ). In addition, a firm may have information about the quality of the other firm's estimate relative to its own. Thus, a firm might know (or be convinced) which estimate is superior, that is, whether Lm or Lr is closer to the true state L. However, as discussed in §2, we assume that L as well as the correlation between the estimates are unknown. Moreover, it is important to reiterate that we assume belief updating does not occur for the situations we consider.
Under this information asymmetry, the firm with a superior estimate needs a mechanism to convey its information (about Lm or Lr ) to the other firm when it is profitable to do so. The transmission of this information can be successful only if the other firm finds itself better off, or at least no worse off, to use such information. Throughout this paper, we say that information

sharing occurs when such transmission is successful, that is, when the firms share their private information about demand volatility (Lm or Lr ).
In a coordinated channel, the two firms act as if they were a single entity, which implies the absence of double marginalization and a retail price and order quantity that maximize the channel profits. As we demonstrate in §3, the wholesale price by itself neither coordinates the channel nor achieves information sharing. Iyer and Villas-Boas (2003) show that, under deterministic demand and complete information, a wholesale-price-only contract coordinates the channel when the retailer's bargaining power is sufficiently large. A bargaining framework, however, is beyond the scope of this paper. An alternative pricing scheme, the two-part tariff consisting of a fixed fee and a variable fee, coordinates the channel under symmetric information. However, it is not clear whether a two-part tariff achieves information sharing in the presence of information asymmetry. For the remainder of this section, we examine the potential value of information sharing under a wholesale price regime, and explore how information can be shared in a mutually beneficial manner using profit sharing and buyback contracts. A parallel analysis under a two-part tariff regime is provided in §5.
4.1. The Value of Information Sharing In §3 we analyzed the impact of the manufacturer and retailer having asymmetric estimates of the demand volatility under a wholesale-price-only regime without information sharing. In this section we examine the potential value of sharing such information in terms of increased channel profits. We also consider the consequences for the profit-maximizing strategies in terms of pricing and order quantities.
The fundamental questions in our model are whether information sharing always has the potential to improve channel profits and how information sharing impacts each firm's expected profit. To simplify the analysis without sacrificing insights, we henceforth consider a situation where the manufacturer's estimate of demand volatility is perfect (i.e., Lm = L), but the retailer's estimate deviates from the true state. The potential value of information sharing is obtained by comparing the situation of no information sharing (analyzed in §3) with the situation of perfect information sharing. The latter refers to the situation where both firms use the best available estimate Lm. (Recall that, as discussed in §2, information sharing takes care of itself whenever Lr is superior and is of little interest to analyze further.)
Proposition 2. Suppose Lm = L and let Lr = Lm + , where denotes the deviation from the true state, Lm, and satisfies the regularity condition 0  Lm +  1. Under a wholesale-price-only regime, information sharing improves

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

523

expected channel profits when > 0, but can either increase or decrease channel profits when < 0. More precisely, when < 0 information sharing increases expected channel profits if and only if the information-sharing condition (ISC) is satisfied

Lm b + H b Lm / b -1 1-bH b Lm

Lm 0 b

· H b Lm H b Lm +

b+1
1

/4Lm (ISC)

where H b Lm and b Lm depend only on b, Lm, and .

To appreciate the above proposition, we identify the sources of distortion in the channel. Compared to a coordinated channel with complete information, the current channel suffers from three types of distortion: double marginalization, demand uncertainty, and miscalculation of demand uncertainty. Whereas the first two types of distortion are detrimental to both firms (the effect of demand uncertainty on firms' profits is delineated in Proposition 1), the effect of the third type of distortion on the two firms can be asymmetric. As asserted in Lemmas 3 and 4, both the profit-maximizing retail price pr wm and order quantity qr wm are distorted by uncertainty. By contrast, the wholesale price is unaffected by the demand volatility. In the absence of information sharing, the manufacturer takes the retailer's order quantity as given and produces exactly that amount. Hence, the manufacturer does not bear any risk associated with demand volatility. When > 0, which means that the retailer overestimates the demand uncertainty, it leads to a higher retail price and a lower order quantity than what would otherwise be the case (see discussion in §3). The opposite is true when < 0. An interesting conclusion from Proposition 2 is that whenever the retailer underestimates the demand volatility (i.e.,
< 0), it is only the price elasticity b and the manufacturers estimate Lm that determine whether information sharing causes channel profits to increase or decrease (see (ISC)). Hence, using Proposition 2, the manufacturer can assess for which (or equivalently Lr estimates) sharing its superior information about the demand volatility would increase channel profits and when it would reduce them.
To illustrate these points, Figure 3 shows the difference in the manufacturer's and the retailer's expected profits when perfect sharing takes place (Lr = Lm = L) compared to when no information sharing occurs. We use the notation

m = m zm wm pm wm wm - m zr wm pr wm wm and
r = E r zm wm pm wm wm - E r zr wm pr wm wm

Figure 3

The Value of Information Sharing Under a Wholesale-PriceOnly Regime


r



-1

0

1

m
where E r zm wm pm wm wm is the retailer's actual expected profit when the optimal strategies are based on the superior estimate Lm (which in our case happens to coincide with the true state, L). E r zr wm pr wm wm is the actual expected retailer profit when no information sharing takes place. A positive r (or m) implies that the firm's expected profit increases when information is shared, whereas a negative value means it decreases.
From Figure 3 we can see that information sharing increases both the retailer's and the manufacturer's profits when the retailer overestimates the demand uncertainty (when > 0), a result that follows from Proposition 1. In this case, information sharing is incentive compatible and improves channel profits (Proposition 2). That is, both parties are better off with respect to their expected profits when using Lm. On the other hand, when the retailer underestimates the demand uncertainty ( < 0), we can see that information sharing decreases the manufacturer's profit although it still benefits the retailer (and r > 0 when
< 0). This result also follows from Proposition 1. Moreover, as asserted in Proposition 2, Figure 3 indicates that the loss in the manufacturer's profit of sharing the information on demand volatility can exceed the gain in the retailer's profit (when < 0), i.e., condition (ISC) is not satisfied. This causes a conflict of interest and information sharing reduces channel profits. Thus, we conclude that information sharing might or might not be valuable in an uncoordinated channel, and it depends in a complicated way on the price elasticity b and the demand estimates Lm and Lr .
Note that before the firms actually share their information, they do not know with certainty whether they are facing a situation where it is beneficial to do so. This implies incentive issues for the manufacturer to share its superior information. To illustrate this further, consider the manufacturer's situation prior to

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

524

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

information sharing. Given that it has no prior knowledge of the retailer's estimate Lr (beyond the fact that it deviates from the true volatility Lm), one can argue that from the manufacturer's perspective, Lr is a stochastic variable with a range 0  Lr  1 (or equivalently 0  Lm +  1). Using Proposition 2 and (ISC), the manufacturer may determine the range of where information sharing increases and decreases expected channel profits, respectively, and thus determine when information sharing would be beneficial.
Given our model setup, we can therefore conclude that it is not obvious that the manufacturer is always willing to share its superior information because doing so could improve the retailer's profit at the expense of reducing its own profit. Although information sharing reduces or eliminates the distortion caused by the miscalculation of demand uncertainty, its impact on the profits of the manufacturer and the retailer is asymmetric. In particular, information sharing is not incentive compatible when the retailer underestimates demand volatility.
4.2. Information-Sharing Contracts As discussed earlier, firms need to overcome incentive and credibility problems to achieve information sharing. Next we investigate two alternative contractual arrangements that help achieve information sharing. In particular, these contracts are relatively easy to implement. We first analyze the profit-sharing contract when the quality of the demand estimates is common knowledge; we then examine the buyback contract when only one firm knows whose demand estimate is superior. In addition, we study the effect of information sharing on pricing, firms' profits, and channel profits.
4.2.1. The Profit-Sharing Contract. When both the manufacturer and the retailer know which demand estimate is superior, credibility is not an issue, but the incentive problem remains. A profit-sharing contract is a simple mechanism to facilitate information sharing under such circumstances. Because information sharing takes care of itself when the retailer's estimate is superior, we only consider the case when the manufacturer's estimate is superior. Our analysis presumes that the manufacturer has an interest in sharing. (As explained in §3.1, this is not always the case because the manufacturer might conclude before the fact that the risk of reducing the expected channel profit is too high.) The sequence of actions is as follows. First, the manufacturer and the retailer negotiate for a division of the combined gain in profits when information sharing occurs. The gain (loss) in profit for each firm is relative to the no-information-sharing case, where the firms use their own demand estimates. Although the division can be arbitrary depending on each firm's bargaining power, we assume without loss

of generality that both firms split the gain equally.

Second, if the negotiation is successful, both firms

submit their demand estimates simultaneously. Other-

wise, the firms do not reveal their demand estimates

and the game proceeds as in the no-information-

sharing case described in §3. The solution concept

in the profit-sharing contract is one of Nash bar-

gaining. Without information sharing, the equilib-

rium strategy (zr wm pr wm wm ) is based on the retailer's demand estimate. With information sharing,

both firms use the superior estimate Lm when determining the optimal strategy (zm wm pm wm wm ). Third, after the demand estimates are revealed, both

parties agree that Lm is the best available estimate of the true demand volatility. Under this esti-

mate the retailer's expected profit with and without

information sharing are E

and E m

r zr wm pr wm

mwm r

zm wm pm wm , respectively.

wm Simi-

larly, the manufacturer's profit with and without

information sharing are m zm wm pm wm wm and m zr wm pr wm wm . Hence, after the contract is
signed (in our case after the fifty-fifty split is agreed

on), the firms' perceived change in the expected total

channel profits is

=E m

r zm wm pm wm wm

-E m

r zr wm pr wm wm

+ m zm wm pm wm wm

- m zr wm pr wm wm

(15)

and the profit-sharing contract dictates that the manufacturer and the retailer each receives 1/2 in equilibrium.
A prominent feature of the profit-sharing contract is that although the agreement on how to split the gain in channel profits is reached ex ante, before the demand is realized, the actual profit sharing occurs ex post, after the demand realization. Note that in (15) represents the expected actual gain in profits if Lm = L. Given the intrinsic stochasticity of the demand, a profit-sharing contract can lead to either an increase or a decrease of the profits of both firms in realization. This means that under this contract the manufacturer and the retailer share the risk associated with the demand uncertainty.4 As outlined in Lemma 3, the optimal retail price and order quantity can either increase or decrease depending on whether information sharing reduces the retailer's overestimation or underestimation. Furthermore, from Proposition 2 and Figure 3, we can conclude that the sign of
as defined in (15) is ambiguous (note that is equivalent to r + m under the presumption that

4 Under a wholesale-price-only contract the retailer bears this risk on his own.

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

525

the manufacturer's estimate is correct). This suggests that after signing the contract the firms might realize that the perceived change in expected profits due to information sharing, , is negative. Profit sharing in this case means that the retailer has to give up profits to the manufacturer, and both parties end up being worse off. Consequently, the retailer has incentives to break the contract, to use the manufacturer's estimate, which it now knows, and leave the manufacturer to take the entire profit loss. Hence, some kind of enforcing mechanisms might be required to secure the contract.
4.2.2. The Buyback Contract. When only the manufacturer knows the quality of the demand estimates, and the retailer overestimates the demand volatility, the manufacturer can offer a buyback contract to induce the retailer to order more and credibly convey his information to the retailer in the process.
When the manufacturer offers a return policy, s, the retailer's profit function is given by

r

z

pw 

s

y p

= y p

p-w p-w

r - w-s z- r r - p-w r -z

r z (16)
r >z

the retailer's profit maximization problem, given w and s, can be written as

max E

zp

r

rzpw s

=y p

z

z

p -w xf x dx - w -s

1-Lr

r

1-Lr

1+Lr

+

p - w xf x dx

z

r

1+Lr

-

p - w x - z f x dx

z

r

z-x f x dx r

z

= y p p - w - w - s z - x f x dx

1-Lr

r

1+Lr

-

p - w x - z f x dx

(17)

z

r

Noting that a return policy is activated only when the mean adjusted demand falls below zr = zr w s , we can write the manufacturer's profit maximization
problem as

max E

ws

m

m w s qr

= y pr

w - c zr - s

G Lm zr 1-Lm

zr - x f m x dx



=y

pr

 

w - c · zr

zr

w-c

· zr - s

zr - 1 - Lm 4Lm

1 - Lm  zr  1 + Lm

w - c · zr - s · zr - 1 zr

<
2
>

1 1

- Lm + Lm

(18)

where G Lm zr is similarly defined as Equation (14). The optimal wholesale price, return policy, and retail price can be obtained through a standard backward induction approach. However, because of the complexity of the profit function, closed-form expressions for these parameters do not exist in the general case. To attain an understanding of the behavior of pr w s and qr w s , we therefore focus on the special case where Lr = 1, and we can derive analytical results.
Proposition 3. Given w, and Lr = 1, the optimal retail price pr w s is decreasing in the return policy s, and the optimal order quantity qr w s is increasing in the return policy s.

Proposition 3 asserts that for any given wholesale price, the manufacturer can offer a return policy to induce the retailer to charge a lower retail price and order more. Hence, when pricing is endogenous a return policy will stimulate larger retailer orders. The manufacturer will offer only a return policy that improves its expected profit (18). Similarly, the retailer will accept only a policy that improves its expected profit (17). This implies that by offering a return policy, the retailer's overestimation of demand volatility is reduced, and the expected profits for both firms are improved. Although we can demonstrate these relationships analytically only for Lr = 1, our numerical studies suggest that Proposition 2 holds for Lr > Lm. Padmanabhan and Png (1997) and Emmons and Gilbert (1998) show similar relationships under symmetric demand information. Consequently, our results demonstrate that a return policy helps to achieve information sharing under asymmetric information and continues to be an effective tool for channel coordination. Note, however that a return policy is generally not as efficient as other types of contracts, such as the profit-sharing contract and the two-part tariff (discussed in §5). The intuition is as follows. A return policy impacts the optimal wholesale price and retail price, thereby inducing the retailer to place a larger order. The distortion of the pricing decisions results in deadweight loss. By contrast, a profitsharing contract achieves information sharing through a fixed fee, which is free from distortion and deadweight loss. However, the key advantage of the return policy is the ease of implementation, which probably explains the popularity of this type of policy in realworld practice.

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

526

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

5. A Two-Part Tariff Regime

In §4, we examined the value of information shar-

ing and some contracts to facilitate sharing in an

uncoordinated channel operating under a wholesale-

price-only regime. We now turn to an alternative

two-part tariff regime. Under a bilateral monopoly

and symmetric information, it is well known (e.g.,

Locay and Rodriguez 1992, Raju and Zhang 2005)

that the optimal two-part tariff is in the form of the

manufacturer charging the retailer a fixed fee and

a wholesale price at the marginal cost. A wholesale

price at the marginal cost eliminates double marginal-

ization and ensures maximum channel profits. The

fixed fee serves to split the channel profits between

the manufacturer and the retailer. Note that given

asymmetric information about the demand volatility

the firms have different perceptions of the expected

channel profits. From the manufacturer's perspec-

tive the expected channel profit before information

sharing fee can

is be

E m

r zm c pm c c

expressed as mE m

, and r zm c

the fixed pm c c ,

where m  0 1 . Because the wholesale price is c,

without the fixed fee the manufacturer's profit is

zero. From the retailer's perspective the expected

channel profit is E fixed fee is r E r r zr r c

r zr c pr c

pr c c c , with

and the r 0 1.

The actual expected channel profit, unknown to

the firms, is E r zr c pr c c . To do business, the firms must agree on the fixed fee, i.e.,

mE m r zm c pm c c = r E r r zr c pr c c . Note that unless Lr = Lm, the negotiated fee constitutes different portions of the firms' perceived

channel profits, i.e., m = r . The size of the fee clearly depends on the firms' bargaining power, which can be

influenced by the quality of the demand information

and knowledge thereof, i.e., which firm has the supe-

rior demand estimate and which knows about this.

However, as we asserted in §4, a detailed treatment

of bargaining is beyond the scope of this paper.

Clearly, a two-part tariff coordinates the channel

when the manufacturer and the retailer have sym-

metric information (i.e., Lr = Lm and m = r ). This is because the wholesale price is set to the marginal

cost and the manufacturer derives his profit solely

from the fixed fee, which is a portion of the retailer's

expected profit. As a result, maximizing the retailer's

expected profit amounts to maximizing the expected

channel profits. In the absence of information asym-

metry, the manufacturer concurs with the retailer's

perceived expected profit. Thus, there is no disagree-

ment about the portion of the channel profits that con-

stitute the fixed fee.

As under the wholesale price regime in §4, a fun-

damental question under a two-part tariff regime

with asymmetric information about demand volatil-

ity is the potential for information sharing to improve

expected channel profits, and the impact of that on the firms' individual profits. Noting that the expected channel profit equals the retailer's expected profit, it follows that information sharing as defined in this paper affects the channel profit only when the manufacturer's estimate Lm is superior. To assess the value of information sharing, we therefore follow the approach in §4 and compare the situation of no information sharing with that of perfect information sharing, where both firms use the superior estimate Lm = L.
Lemma 5. Under a two-part tariff, perfect information sharing always improves the expected channel profits.
Without information sharing, the expected channel profit is equivalent to the retailer's actual expected profit E r zr c pr c c , where the pricing and order decisions are based on the retailer's demand estimate, Lr . Consistent with Proposition 1, both overestimation and underestimation of the demand volatility are detrimental to the retailer's actual expected profit and therefore also to the channel. When the manufacturer shares its superior demand information Lm with the retailer, the expected channel profit increases and creates an opportunity for both firms to be better off than before. It is not clear, however, whether a two-part tariff suffices to achieve information sharing when the manufacturer and the retailer have different demand estimates, which is the case in our model. We therefore need to further examine when (if ever) a two-part tariff coordinates the channel under asymmetric demand information. We address these issues next, for each option in our information sharing taxonomy outlined in Table 1.
Proposition 4. (i) If the quality of the demand volatility estimates is private information, a two-part tariff achieves information sharing and coordinates the channel in Scenario 1b and Scenario 2a; in Scenario 1a, Scenario 2b, and Scenario 3, it does not achieve information sharing, but it may coordinate the channel if there is no dispute about the fixed fee. (ii) If the quality of the estimates of demand volatility is common knowledge, a two-part tariff achieves information sharing and coordinates the channel when combined with a profit-sharing contract.
When firms have asymmetric demand estimates, a two-part tariff does not always achieve information sharing and fails to coordinate the channel under certain conditions. This is in contrast to the situation under symmetric information, where a two-part tariff always coordinates the channel. The intuitions are as follows. When each firm has its own demand estimate, it also has an asymmetric estimate of the total channel profits, and this can lead to disagreement on the amount of fixed fee. When the quality of the demand estimates is private information, a two-part tariff by itself cannot resolve such dispute.

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

527

Under a two-part tariff, the incentive problem in a profit-sharing contract is relatively simple. Because information sharing always improves the expected channel profits, the firms need only to negotiate an agreement on how to split the benefits from information sharing. However, a profit-sharing contract is feasible only when the quality of demand estimates is common knowledge. It is interesting to compare the properties of a two-part tariff with those of a profitsharing contract. A two-part tariff is strictly an ex ante contract; both the wholesale price and the fixed fee are set before the demand realization. By contrast, a profit-sharing contract has both ex ante and ex post components. Although the terms of the contracts are determined before the demand realization, the execution of the contract occurs after the demand realization. Therefore, a two-part tariff is risk free to the manufacturer, whereas a profit-sharing contract leads to risk sharing between the manufacturer and the retailer.
6. Conclusion
As Padmanabhan and Png (1997, p. 82) eloquently put it, "one of the few certainties about the demand for products such as new books, CDs, software, fashion wear, and winter clothing is that it is uncertain." Fortunately, many of the results from the extant channel literature remain robust with or without demand uncertainty. However, important questions arise when firms in a distribution channel face asymmetric demand uncertainty: Should this information be shared, what is the value of sharing, and how can sharing be accomplished?
In this paper, we provide insights into some of these issues. Rather than looking at uncertainty about demand level, we focus on firms' asymmetric information on demand volatility. We consider a situation with price-dependent multiplicative demand uncertainty where firms are correct in estimating the average demand, but they might miscalculate the extent of demand volatility. In addition, our setup assumes that firms cannot refine their demand estimates using historical data and that the correlation between the firms' demand estimates is unknown. Thus, our setup might apply to one-shot, highly volatile settings, where firms engage in short-term relationships.
Within this context, the value of information sharing stems from the fact that one member of the distribution channel could have a superior estimate of the demand volatility compared to the other member. However, the firms might not have the same information on whose demand estimate is superior. This asymmetric information on the quality of the demand estimates further complicates information sharing. Within the confines of our modeling framework, we

demonstrate that demand volatility can have substantial impact on retail price, order quantity, and the firms' profits. Although information sharing always improves channel profits in a coordinated channel, it is not necessarily so if the channel is uncoordinated because of asymmetric demand information. Depending on the specific information structure, there are different strategies and contracts that firms can use to facilitate information sharing. Two prominent examples that we consider in this work are profit-sharing contracts and return policies.
Our model could be extended in several directions. In this paper, we consider a channel of bilateral monopoly in a single-period setting, it is interesting to investigate how upstream and downstream competition moderate information sharing; it is also interesting to use a signaling framework to examine information sharing in a multiperiod setting.5 Although pricing is a decision variable in our model, we do not consider retail promotion. An important form of uncertainty not covered in the paper is the uncertainty stemming from lead-time constraint and capacity constraint. It would also be interesting to investigate the impact of using other types of demand models, additive demand uncertainty, alternative distributions, etc.6 Finally, many alternative contracts, such as quantity discount contracts, are good candidates for achieving information sharing. We leave these issues to future research.

Appendix. Proofs of Propositions

Proof of Proposition 1. (i) When the manufacturer

only charges a wholesale price, the manufacturer's expected

profit is given by M zm pm w = w - c qr; hence, the sign of M zm pm w / Lr is determined by qr w / Lr . It follows from Lemma 3 that the manufacturer's expected profit

is strictly decreasing for all Lr . To show that the retailer's perceived expected profit,

E r

r zr wm pr wm wm , is decreasing in Lr , we con-

sider its derivative with respect to Lr . For notational con-

venience, let H = H b Lr , H = H b Lr / Lr , pr = pr wm ,

y = y pr wm , y = y pr wm / Lr

E r

r zr wm pr wm wm

Lr

= y pr wm

pr wm - wm 1 - Lr wm /pr wm Lr

=y

pr - wm

1

-

Lr

wm pr

+y

1

-

Lr

wm pr

p

- pr - wm

wm pr

+ Lr

Lr

wm pr

5 See Mayzlin (2006) for a recent example that deals with information exchange among consumers in a multiperiod setting.
6 Lee and Staelin (1997) and Sudhir (2001) show that the functional forms of demand may impact the behavior of certain strategic variables.

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

528

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

= y wm H - 1

1 - Lr H

+y wm H

1 - Lr H

- wm H - 1

1 H

+ Lr

Lr

1 H

= wm y

-bH

H -1

H -Lr +H H H -Lr - H -1 H2

H -Lr H

= wm y

H

-bH 2 + bHLr + bH - bLr + H 2 - Lr H2

-H2 +H

= -wm

H -1 H

y

Clearly, E r

r zr wm pr wm wm

is decreasing in Lr

because from Lemma 1 we know that H > 1.

(ii) Let p wm and z wm denote the retail price and mean-adjusted order quantity, which are optimal under

the true demand uncertainty . Suppose that E r zr wm , pr wm wm  E r z wm , p wm wm for some Lr = L. This implies, however, that p wm and z(wm ) are not optimal for the true state L, which is a contradiction.

(iii) This result follows directly from (i) when Lr = L and the perceived expected profit coincides with the actual

expected profit.

Proof of Proposition 2. Denote the gain in expected

manufacturer, retailer, and channel profits due to perfect

information sharing, r = E m r zm wm pm wm wm -

E m

r zr wm pr wm wm ,

m = m zm wm pm wm

wm - m zr wm pr wm wm , and = m + r , respec-

tively. It follows from Proposition 1(i) that m  0 for  0

and m < 0 for < 0. Furthermore, because Lm = L, Propo-

sition 1(ii) asserts that r  0 for all such that 0  Lm +

 1. Hence, it is clear that information sharing always

improves channel profits when the retailer overestimates

the demand variability, i.e., > 0 for  0. To prove that

information sharing may either decrease or increase channel

profits when < 0, we show that the sign of is ambigu-

ous. For notational simplicity we use zi = zi wm and pi = pi wm for i = m r .
When < 0 it follows that 1 - Lm  zr  1 + Lm, and by definition 1 - Lm  zm  1 + Lm. We get

E m

r zr pr wm

= y pr

pr - wm - wm zr zr - x fm x dx 1-Lm

- pr - wm

1+Lm zr

x - zr

fm

x

dx

= c-b+1y

b2H b Lm + b-1 2

b b-1

bH b Lm + - 1 b-1

· 1 - 1 + Lm - zr 2 - zr - 1 + Lm 2

4Lm

4Lm

and

E m

r zm pm wm

= c-b+1y

b2H b Lm b-1 2

· bH b Lm - 1 b-1

b b-1 1 - 1 + Lm - zm 2
4Lm

- zm - 1 + Lm 2 4Lm

Recall that m  U 1 - Lm 1 + Lm , y p = ap-b, wm = c b/ b - 1 , pr = wm b/ b - 1 H b Lm + , and pm = wm b/ b - 1 H b Lm . Similarly,

m zr pr wm = c-b+1y

b2H b Lm + b-1 2

1 b-1

zr

and

m zm pm wm = c-b+1y

b2H b Lm b-1 2

1 b-1

zm

Let the expected channel profit with and without perfect

information sharing be where

zm pm wm and

zr pr wm ,

zi pi wm =

m zi

pi

wm

+E m

r zi pi wm

Starting from the expressions for the expected manufacturer's and retailer's profits above, simplified expressions for the channel profits can be derived, omitting the algebraic details we get (note that zr and zm are given by (9))

zm pm wm = c-b+1y

b2H b Lm b-1 2

b-1 bH b Lm

Lm 0 b

and

zr pr wm = c-b+1y

b2H b Lm + b-1 2

b-1 bH b Lm +

·

Lm

b + H Lm b 1 - bH Lm b

b-1

4Lm

where H b Lm = bH b Lm + / b - 1 - 2 , and

b Lm

=

b b-1

b2H b Lm + b-1 2

2
- Lm

- b 1 + Lm H b Lm + b-1

- 2Lm

The condition

= zm pm wm - zr pr wr  0 can

now be simplified into (ISC), which holds if and only if

 0. (Note that by definition zm pm wm  0

Lm b + H b Lm / b - 1 1 - bH b Lm Lm 0 b

· H b Lm H b Lm +

b+1
1

/4Lm (ISC)

It follows that the sign of the expected gain in channel prof-

its is a function of b, Lm, and , but independent of c and a. By example, it is easy to show that condition (ISC)

might or might not be satisfied for < 0. For example, if

b = 2 and Lm = 1, (ISC) is satisfied (i.e.,  0) for all possible -1 < < 0 . On the other hand, for b = 1 05, Lm = 1, (ISC) is not satisfied for any relevant (-1 < < 0), i.e.,

< 0. Finally, if b = 1 5 and Lm = 1, (ISC) is satisfied for -0 48  < 0, but not satisfied for -1 <  -0 49.

Proof of Proposition 3. Given w, s, and Lr = 1, we determine a solution to the maximization problem (17)

using the first-order optimality conditions. First, the partial

derivative of E r

rzpw s

with respect to z renders the

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

529

optimal mean-adjusted order quantity for any given retail price p  w zr p w s = 1 + p + s / p - s Lr - 2wLr / p - s . Substituting this expression back into the retailer's profit
function and solving for p using the first-order optimality
condition we obtain the optimal retail price as a function of
w and s

pr

w

s

=

2

1 b-1

b+1 w+ b-2 s+A

where

A = b + 1 2w2 + b - 2 2s2 - 2b2 - 2b + 4 ws

Under the necessary condition pr w s  w  s, it is possible to show that A is real for all b > 1 and that the solution is
unique. Omitting the algebraic details, it is straightforward
to show that

pr w s

s

=

b-2

A+

b - 2 2s - 2A b - 1

b2 - b + 2

w

0

for all b > 1 and w  s.
Similarly, for the mean-adjusted order quantity zr w s (obtained by substituting pr w s into the expression for zr p w s ), it can be shown that after defining g = b + 1 w - bs + A,

zr w s = 4 b - 1 s

A + 3 b + 1 w - 3b - 2 s g2A

0

for all b  1 and w  s. We also have

y pr w s s

= y pr w s

b - pr w s

pr w s  0 s

where the last inequality is a consequence of the result that
pr w s / s  0. Because zr w s  0 and pr w s  0, it follows that

qr w s s

=

s zr w s y pr w s

= y pr w s

zr w s

s

-

bzr w pr w

s s

pr w s s

0

for b  1 and w  s.

Proof of Proposition 4. Under a two-part tariff and

symmetric demand estimates (i.e., r = m), the manufac-

turer's profit is given by

E r

r zr c pr c c , where

 0 1 is determined by the bargaining power of the man-

ufacturer. We first consider the situation where the quality

of the demand estimates is private information.

Scenario 1. The manufacturer knows whose estimate is

superior, but the retailer does not:

(a) If the manufacturer's estimate is superior, it would

expect a higher fixed fee if it reveals it to the retailer, because

by using it the retailer can increase the expected channel

profits. However, the retailer has no knowledge of the qual-

ity of the demand estimates, and therefore has no reason

to abandon its own estimate and use the manufacturer's

instead. Because the manufacturer has no means to convince

the manufacturer to use its superior estimate without reduc-

ing the fixed fee, and thereby lower its own profit, a two-

part tariff by itself does not achieve information sharing.

Even if the firms use their own demand estimates a two-

part tariff may still coordinate the chain. An agreement can

be reached if the smallest fee that the manufacturer is will-

ing to accept is mE m

is lower than

·E r

r

r zm zr c

c pr

pm c cc

c .

, and this amount

(b) If the retailer's estimate is superior, the manufac-

turer simply accepts that, and both firms negotiate a fixed

fee of

·E r

r zr c pr c c

based on the best available

estimate of the expected channel profits. In doing so, infor-

mation sharing occurs and the two firms share the benefits

of the superior information.

Scenario 2. The retailer knows whose information is

superior, but the manufacturer does not:

(a) If the manufacturer's estimate is superior, the

retailer simply agrees to use that estimate and negotiate

a fixed fee of

·E m

r zm c pm c c

based on the best

available estimate of the expected channel profits. In doing

so, information sharing occurs, and the two firms share the

benefits of the superior information.

(b) If the retailer's estimate is superior, the retailer

agrees pr c c

to ,

pay a fixed fee of no but it has no means to

more than convince the

·E r

r zr c

manufacturer

that its information renders the best available estimate of

the channel profits. The manufacturer therefore uses its own

demand estimate to determine the expected channel profit

as a basis for negotiating the fixed fee. An agreement can

be reached if the smallest fee that the manufacturer is will-

ing to accept is mE is lower than · E
r

m r

r zm zr c

c pr

pm c

c c

c and this amount , but no information

sharing occurs.

Scenario 3. Neither firm knows whose information is

superior:

The firms can reach an agreement on the fixed fee if

mE m r zm c pm c c  r E r r zr c pr c c
but not otherwise, because each firm has its own demand estimate and there is no incentive for either firm to accept the other firm's proposal that is perceived to make itself worse off. In either case, information sharing does not occur because neither firm has any incentive to abandon its own estimate.
When the quality of the demand estimates is common knowledge, the two firms can negotiate a profit-sharing contract to achieve information sharing, as outlined in §3.2.1. In doing so, the channel is coordinated.

Acknowledgments Authors are listed in alphabetical order; each author contributed equally. The authors thank Sven Axsäter, Yongmin Chen, Yuxin Chen, Anne Coughlan, Dmitri Kuksov, Rakesh Niraj, Elie Ofek, Ambar Rao, and the seminar participants at the 2006 Summer Institute in Competitive Strategies (SICS) for their helpful comments. The topic of this paper was inspired by a conversation with Chakravarthi Narasimhan during the first SICS conference in 2003.

References
Amaldoss, W., A. Rapoport. 2005. Collaborative product and market development: Theoretical implications and experimental evidence. Marketing Sci. 24(3) 396­414.

He, Marklund, and Vossen: Vertical Information Sharing in a Volatile Market

530

Marketing Science 27(3), pp. 513­530, © 2008 INFORMS

Biyalogorsky, E., O. Koenigsberg. 2004. Lead time, uncertainty, and channel decision making. Working paper, Columbia University, New York.
Cachon, G. P. 2003. Supply chain coordination with contracts. A. G. de Kok, S. C. Graves, eds. Handbooks in OR & MS, Vol. 11. Elsevier B.V., Amsterdam, 229­297.
Cachon, G. P., M. Fisher. 2000. Supply chain inventory management and the value of shared information. Management Sci. 46(8) 1032­1048.
Cachon, G. P., M. Lariviere. 2001. Contracting to assure supply: How to share demand forecasts in a supply chain. Management Sci. 47(5) 629­646.
Chen, F. 2003. Information sharing and supply chain coordination. A. G. de Kok, S. C. Graves, eds. Handbooks in OR & MS, Vol. 11. Elsevier B.V., Amsterdam, 341­421.
Coughlan, A. T. 1985. Competition and cooperation in marketing channel choice: Theory and application. Marketing Sci. 4(2) 110­129.
Desai, P. S. 2000. Multiple messages to retain retailers: Signaling new product demand. Marketing Sci. 19(4) 381­389.
Emmons, H., S. M. Gilbert. 1998. The role of returns policies in pricing and inventory decisions for catalogue goods. Management Sci. 44(2) 276­283.
Field, A. 2005. Getting in sync. J. Commerce (Mar 7) 1.
Forrester, J. W. 1958. Industrial dynamics. Harvard Bus. Rev. 36(July­August) 37­66.
Gal-Or, E. 1986. Information transmission­Cournot and Bertrand equilibria. Rev. Econom. Stud. 53(172) 85­92.
Gu, Z., Y. Chen. 2005. Conflict and information integration in distribution channels. Working paper, New York University, New York.
Iyer, G., J. M. Villas-Boas. 2003. A bargaining theory of distribution channels. J. Marketing Res. 40(1) 80­100.
Jeuland, A., S. Shugan. 1983. Managing channel profit. Marketing Sci. 2(3) 239­272.
Karlin, S., C. R. Carr. 1962. Prices and optimal inventory policies. S. Karlin, K. J. Arrow, H. Scarf, eds. Studies in Applied Probability and Management Science. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA, 159­172.
Kulp, S., H. Lee, E. Ofek. 2004. Manufacturer benefits from information integration with retail customers. Management Sci. 50(4) 431­444.
Lal, R. 1990. Improving channel coordination through franchising. Marketing Sci. 9(4) 299­318.

Lee, E., R. Staelin. 1997. Vertical strategic interaction: Implications for channel pricing strategy. Marketing Sci. 16(3) 185­207.
Lee, H., V. Padmanabhan, S. Whang. 1997. Information distribution in a supply chain: The bullwhip effect. Management Sci. 43(4) 546­558.
Lee, H., K. So, C. Tang. 2000. The value of information sharing in a two-level supply chain. Management Sci. 46(5) 626­643.
Li, L. 2002. Information sharing in a supply chain with horizontal competition. Management Sci. 48(9) 1196­1212.
Li, X. 2005. Cheap talk and bogus network externalities in the emerging technology market. Marketing Sci. 24(4) 531­543.
Locay, L., A. Rodriguez. 1992. Price discrimination in competitive markets. J. Political Econom. 100(5) 954­965.
Mayzlin, D. 2006. Promotional chat on the internet. Marketing Sci. 25(2) 155­163.
McGuire, T. W., R. Staelin. 1983. An industry equilibrium analysis of downstream vertical integration. Marketing Sci. 2(2) 161­192.
Mills, E. S. 1959. Uncertainty and price theory. Quart. J. Econom. 73(1) 117­130.
Niraj, R., C. Narasimhan. 2002. Vertical information sharing in distribution channels. Working paper, University of Southern California, Los Angeles.
Padmanabhan, V., I. P. L. Png. 1997. Manufacturer's returns policies and retail competition. Marketing Sci. 16(1) 81­95.
Petruzzi, N., M. Dada. 1999. Pricing and the newsvendor problem: A review with extensions. Oper. Res. 47(2) 183­194.
Porteus, E. L. 1990. Stochastic inventory theory. D. P. Heyman, M. J. Sobel, eds. Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science, Vol. 2. Elsevier, North Holland, the Netherlands, 605­652.
Raju, J., Z. J. Zhang. 2005. Channel coordination in the presence of a dominant retailer. Marketing Sci. 24(2) 254­262.
Ray, S., H. Chen, M. Bergen, D. Levy. 2006. Asymmetric wholesale pricing: Theory and evidence. Marketing Sci. 25(2) 131­154.
Sudhir, K. 2001. Structural analysis of manufacturer pricing in the presence of a strategic retailer. Marketing Sci. 4(2) 244­264.
Villas-Boas, J. M. 1994. Sleeping with the enemy: Should competitors share the same advertising agency? Marketing Sci. 13(2) 190­202.
Vives, X. 1984. Duopoly information equilibrium: Cournot and Bertrand. J. Econom. Theory 34(1) 71­94.
Whitin, T. M. 1955. Inventory control and price theory. Management Sci. 2(1) 61­68.
Zarley, C., K. Damore. 1996. Backlogs plague HP--Resellers place phantom orders to get more products. Comput. Reseller News (May 6) 247.

