Vol. 25, No. 2, March­April 2006, pp. 116­130 issn 0732-2399 eissn 1526-548X 06 2502 0116

informs ®
doi 10.1287/mksc.1050.0169 © 2006 INFORMS

Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

Liang Guo
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China, mkguo@ust.hk
When purchase and consumption decisions are separated in time and when future utility is state dependent, consumers may desire to pursue consumption flexibility by purchasing different products together (multiple buying). This paper analyzes the effects of consumption flexibility on competing firms' marketing mix decisions, in a model in which future preference uncertainty exists and consumers differ in their preferred product location on a horizontal attribute. The analysis shows that the nature of price competition in such markets is dependent upon whether consumer multiple buying (and thus primary demand) is endogenously induced. When preference uncertainty is important, the firms are involved in a "flexibility trap" in which primary demand is expanded but profits decrease with the spread of consumer heterogeneity. This counter-intuitive result is caused by the firms being induced to over-cut prices to increase primary demand when consumption flexibility is important. In response to this, the firms may configure their products to alleviate the adverse effect of consumer heterogeneity. For example, if preference uncertainty is important, the firms may choose to minimize differentiation on the horizontal attribute, or extend the current product line, to deal with the "flexibility trap." The implications of allowing for positive salvage value, uncertainty heterogeneity, preference correlation, and state-dependent preference configuration are also investigated.
Key words: consumption flexibility; horizontal differentiation; market expansion; positioning; preference uncertainty; price competition; product line extension
History: This paper was received June 16, 2004, and was with the author 5 months for 3 revisions; processed by Jinhong Xie.

1. Introduction
1.1. Consumption Flexibility and Consumer Choice
In many differentiated markets, consumer decision making is characterized by two general features. First, the purchase and consumption occasions are not synchronous. Consumers usually buy products or services (called products hereafter) prior to actual consumption. For example, the purchase of appliances, computers or cameras commonly precedes actual use. Most frequently purchased packaged goods are also characterized by the separation in time between a store visit and consumption. Second, the future consumption utility is state dependent (Hauser and Wernerfelt 1990), even for search goods with perfectly known physical attributes or quality. The time lag between purchase and consumption may give rise to uncertainty about future utility, which will be resolved only at the consumption time. The uncertainty could be due to inherent product quality variability (Roberts and Urban 1988), or context-dependent factors such as weather, consumption mood, and so on. For example, on a rainy weekend watching an indoor hockey match is more enjoyable than a football game, although the weather

is probably unpredictable at the time of the ticket purchase.
Consumers may therefore desire to maintain consumption flexibility (Kreps 1979, Walsh 1995). When facing state-dependent utility, a consumer can circumvent potential consumption constraints by buying a variety of products together. In doing so, subsequent consumption can be adjusted according to future states. Desired consumption can therefore be guaranteed irrespective of state realizations in future situations. A recent article in PC World (McCracken 2004) entitled "The More Operating Systems, the Merrier" describes how the author started "a bi-platform life" with both a PC and a Mac. Noticing that "the vast majority of spyware, virus, and Trojan horse writers design malware exclusive for Windows," the author concludes that "the Mac OS is a less irritating platform than Windows I'm glad I realized that the Mac remains a viable option--even for a mostly Windows guy like me" (McCracken 2004, p. 21). Consider another example from a personal experience:1
"One problem with the domestic airline: its service was not reliable; there might be a strike or equipment malfunction or unavailable aircraft or some such
1 I thank an anonymous reviewer for providing this example.

116

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

117

state uncertainty. Faced with the risk of missing my international connection back to the United States, I would often purchase both an air and a rail ticket to Bombay (now "Mumbai"), knowing that, when there was greater certainty about domestic-airline departure close to my departure date for the United States, I could cancel one (at some cancellation charge) and keep the other."
These examples highlight the role of consumption flexibility in consumer choice: buying competing products simultaneously can be an attractive option when faced with preference uncertainty. The products taken together, a PC and a Mac or an air and a rail ticket, can serve as "insurance" for each other against future unforseen contingencies, thereby enhancing the overall mutual benefits. Similar phenomena are prevalent in many marketplaces. Both professional single-lens reflex (SLR) and amateur point-and-shoot cameras can be found in a photographer's gear set. A single wallet may include multiple credit cards. People may own both cell and fixed-line phones, purchase different cosmetics of similar functionality, or subscribe to different TV channels, magazines, or season tickets. Similarly, people may resort to multiple information services (e.g., multiple doctors, lawyers, accountants, stock experts, databases, consulting companies, etc.) to improve decision making (Sarvary and Parker 1997). It is also empirically demonstrated that multiple variety purchases can be significantly explained by consumption flexibility, even for search goods like yogurt (Guo 2005).2
1.2. Research Issues and Summary of Results Consumption flexibility concerns might have interesting implications for competitive marketing strategies. This paper seeks to investigate the effects of consumption flexibility on firms' decisions in competitive markets. The building block of the model is preference uncertainty, and the objective is to examine the mediating role of consumer multiple buying in the relationship between preference uncertainty, consumption flexibility, and competitive marketing mix decisions.3
First, this paper addresses the demand implications of consumers endogenously expanding the purchase option set in response to flexibility considerations. As the considered purchase options grow, the nature of competition between the firms may be changed. For
2 See Villas-Boas (2004a) on market competition and consumer preference learning of experience goods.
3 Given the current focus on strategic issues at the market level, this paper goes beyond explaining the multiple purchase behavior of consumers. There are alternative explanations for the multiplepurchase phenomenon, e.g., variety seeking (McAlister 1982) or stockpiling (Bell et al. 2002, Guo and Villas-Boas 2005).

example, when the consumers' decision is about buying a PC or a Mac, a firm's demand expansion is secondary; i.e., the focus is on switching consumers from the rival firm. However, if consumers are deciding between a PC only and both a PC and a Mac, more Macs can be sold without diminishing PC sales (primary demand expansion), and vice versa. The demand region in which the firms ultimately compete is therefore determined by whether consumers choose to purchase the competing products together. In the current context, consumers self-select the optimal option to purchase by gauging their preferences for flexibility against the prices charged. The motivation to seek flexibility can be translated into an actual multiple purchase only if the market prices are not too high. Otherwise, no consumer buys multiple products and the firms compete for secondary demand only. One may therefore want to ask, what is the underlying incentive for the firms to compete in the primary or secondary demand region, and how does that affect their equilibrium pricing decisions and profits?
This paper identifies the conditions under which consumers in equilibrium buy competing products together. It is shown that when the level of (horizontal) consumer heterogeneity is low, the firms find it attractive to expand primary demand by having some consumers buy the competing products together. They may therefore fall into a "flexibility trap" in which equilibrium profits decrease with consumer heterogeneity even as the demand expands, a result that has not been identified in the literature. The intuition has to do with the different roles that consumer heterogeneity plays in different competitive scenarios: mitigating price competition in the secondary demand region while impeding demand expansion when the firms compete for primary demand.
A related issue is how preference uncertainty may influence competing firms' differentiation decisions. An understanding of this impact can shed light on strategic decisions on product design, positioning, advertising, etc. This paper investigates the firms' incentives to increase or decrease horizontal differentiation between competing products. The firms can strategically adjust their product configurations to mitigate the adverse effect of the "flexibility trap." Interestingly, it is found that when the level of consumer heterogeneity is low and hence multiple buying is more likely to occur, the firms have a strong incentive to minimize horizontal product differentiation.
I extend the analysis to investigate the potential use of product line extension as a "de-trapping" strategy. It is shown that the existence of preference uncertainty might broaden the scope of competitive product offerings, making introducing "me-too" products

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

118

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

profitable. I also investigate the implications of allowing for consumer heterogeneity in preference uncertainty and the correlation between state-dependent preferences and horizontal differentiation. Finally, the robustness of the minimum differentiation strategy is demonstrated in an extension of the base model in which the firms are allowed to configure their products to deliver either positively or negatively correlated state-dependent utility.
1.3. Related Research Kreps (1979) formalizes the rationality underlying a set of choice behaviors whereby consumers strategically add more options to the purchased set to increase future consumption flexibility. Walsh (1995) shows that the desire for flexibility can drive consumers to purchase more varieties in a single shopping basket. In the Walsh model, the separation of purchase and consumption is explicitly recognized, and consumers' rational behavior at both stages is analyzed. At the purchase stage, consumers are aware that their future tastes are uncertain, and their choice behavior therefore involves variety purchases. Moreover, it is shown that consumers may optimally select to consume less-preferred products to preserve future flexibility. Another important contribution by Walsh is that he analytically and empirically distinguishes consumption flexibility from variety seeking. Along this line, Hauser and Wernerfelt (1990) show that uncertain consumers desire to evaluate more options to make a choice. There is also some experimental evidence that people do consider future uncertainty in their choice behavior (Simonson 1990). The focus of all these studies is on consumer behavior. The current paper builds on these studies and moves forward to provide insights into the impact of preference uncertainty on competing firms' strategic interactions in terms of pricing, positioning (differentiation), and product line extension.
Recently, some researchers examined the "multiple discreteness" issue where consumers may buy multiple units of the same and/or different products during a shopping occasion. Kim et al. (2002) offer an explanation based on "horizontal variety seeking," which is caused by diminishing marginal utility. Hendel (1999) and Dube (2004) present an alternative perspective, where multiple purchases are caused by anticipated preference changes over consumption occasions between shopping trips. These studies can be viewed as offering statistical accounts for variety purchases.4
4 Variety purchases could be due to consumption flexibility, variety seeking, and/or group preference heterogeneity. There is empirical evidence that the failure to account for consumption flexibility may lead to misleading estimates on consumer choice behavior (Guo 2005).

Xie and Shugan (2001) investigate advance selling when consumers' future tastes are uncertain.5 Unlike their study in which consumers can spot buy when utility uncertainty is resolved, this paper considers the case when purchase and consumption decisions are strictly separated so that spot buying is not possible. This drives consumers to buy competing products together, which is not considered in their model. This paper is also related to the work by Sarvary and Parker (1997), who examine competition in information markets where different pieces of information can be combined to improve decision making. They study consumer heterogeneity in willingness to pay for quality, whereas this paper considers both horizontal and vertical differentiation. Multiple buying always exists in their study, whereas both multiple and single buying can be an equilibrium in the current model. The studies also differ in the mechanism underlying consumers' incentives to purchase multiple products. In addition, product configuration decisions are endogenized in this paper, although information features are exogenous in their study.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the model, and §3 presents the main analysis and results. The model extensions are presented in §4. The last section concludes the paper and discusses potential directions for future research.
2. The Model
To investigate competing firms' marketing mix decisions with consumer preference uncertainty, consider the following framework. The market is duopolistic with two firms, i = A B, producing at zero marginal costs. Each firm i is endowed with a product denoted by ci, i = A B. Consumers are composed of expectedutility maximizers in both purchase and consumption decisions. In the purchase stage, consumers purchase product(s) that later can be consumed in each of T consumption periods. Consumption utility is uncertain and cannot be foreseen up front at the purchase time. Let us denote product c's state-dependent utility for consumer x in state s as Ux c s .
To characterize Ux c s , let us assume that consumers' valuations are affected by two product features. The first feature differentiates the products on a horizontal attribute (Hotelling 1929) and is state independent. For example, the horizontal attribute could capture the ease of use, physical design, or "snobness" of a computer. Formally, firms A and B
5 Shugan and Xie (2005) study advance selling with competition. Relatedly, the separation of the purchase from consumption raises some interesting issues, e.g., over-selling (Biyalogorsky et al. 1999) and contingent pricing (Biyalogorsky and Gerstner 2004). See also Villas-Boas (2004b) on product line design with consumer confusion.

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

119

are positioned on a unit line 0 1 , whose locations are represented by l and l¯ capturing the distance from the product locations to the end points of the unit line, respectively. That is, product A's location is l, while product B is located at 1 - l¯. Without loss of generality, I can also restrict the locations to 0  l  1 - l¯  1. Consumer type is represented by x capturing a consumer's most preferred product location, which is uniformly distributed on the same line 0 1 . The disutility incurred by consumer x from consuming a product located at l  l 1 - l¯ is given by x - l 2t, where t is a measure of the degree or spread of consumer heterogeneity.6 The disutility is incurred not at the purchase time, but only when the product is actually consumed. Therefore, the characterization of consumer heterogeneity here complies with the interpretation of horizontal differentiation.
Second, to capture the uncertainty of consumption utility, let us assume that there are two states of nature for the future world, s and s¯, with probability and 1 - , respectively. Correspondingly, the products can be classified into two types, namely k and k¯ . All else being equal, the k-type product has higher statedependent value in the state s than the k¯ -type product does, while the reverse is true in the state s¯.7 For instance, in a state of no (Windows) virus infection, a PC is preferred over a Mac probably due to the former's higher compatibility with most software and applications, whereas a Mac is definitely preferred if the PC is infected.8 Similarly, if no strike occurs, people may prefer to take a plane over a train, but the preference is absolutely reversed in the event of an airline strike. Without loss of generality, I assume that the difference in the state-dependent value between the different product types (k or k¯ ) is > 0 in either state.
This characterization of state-dependent utility offers a parsimonious representation of a general set of purchase scenarios in which consumption flexibility is an important concern. Generally, for consumption flexibility to be achieved from variety purchases, what is necessary is only that a consumer's preference ranking of the products in the assortment is reversible depending upon future contingencies. In other words, a product purchased together with other products can increase the flexibility value of the bundle, if and only if it is preferred over other alternatives in at least one (but not all) future state of consumption occa-

6 Quadratic disutility is adopted over its linear counterpart to guarantee the existence of pure-strategy equilibrium when endogenizing the firms' location choices (d'Aspremont et al. 1979).

7 Given the symmetry of the problem, it can be assumed that



0

1 2

. The case of



1 2

1

is analogous.

8 This captures the positive correlation for computers between com-

patibility and vulnerability to virus infection. The case when the

firms can choose the state-dependent type (i.e., compatibility or

OS) is considered in §4.3.

sions. To understand this, the following observations

are worthwhile. First, preference uncertainty does

not necessarily lead to consumption flexibility arising

from multiple purchases. For example, suppose prod-

uct A's and B's state-dependent utility, UA and UB, are drawn from U A UA and U B UB respectively, where U A > UB. Then, no flexibility can be obtained from buying both products together, since product A

is preferred over B in all future contingencies. Second,

preference uncertainty is not necessarily needed on

all products for consumption flexibility to arise from

multiple purchases. In the above example, suppose

product B's utility is certain and UB  U A UA . Then, product B can be used as a "back-up" and can con-

tribute to increasing flexibility, and so can product A.

Therefore, the variability in a PC's (a plane's) utility

can allow a Mac (a train) to increase the overall flex-

ibility value, even though a Mac's (a train's) utility

tends to be less uncertain.

Overall, the consumers' consumption utility is

assumed to be dependent upon the state-dependent

value, as well as upon their horizontal locations. We

can ckl

also k

characterize k k¯ l  0

a 1

firm's product features as ci  , i = A B. In the base model,

the feasible product locations are assumed to be fixed

at zero or one, and the products' utility structure

along the state-dependent dimension is also assumed

to be exogenous, i.e., cA = ck0 and cB = ck¯1. In §3.2, I consider the case when the firms are able to posi-

tion their products along the horizontal line. The base

model is also extended in §4.3 when the firms are

allowed to configure their product types.

I assume that consumers' valuations over the two

dimensions are independent. This implies, for exam-

ple, that a computer's positioning can be changed

along a horizontal attribute (e.g., ease-of-use or "snob-

ness") without influencing its vulnerability to virus

attacks. This assumption captures the inherent pref-

erence uncertainty that exists in many products

(Roberts and Urban 1988), over which firms do not

have as much control as over the products' percep-

tual positioning. Nonetheless, in §4.2 I explore the

implications of allowing for both consumer hetero-

geneity in the state-dependent value and the cor-

relation between the horizontal and state-dependent preferences.9

The state-dependent utility, Ux c s , for consumer x of product ckl in state s  s s¯ is then:

Ux ckl s = Ux ck¯l s¯ = + - x - l 2t

Ux ckl s¯ = Ux ck¯l s = - x - l 2t

9 A noteworthy point is that even though in the base model consumer heterogeneity in the state-dependent value is absent, the heterogeneity on the horizontal dimension allows consumers to differ in their valuation of flexibility, as is illustrated in the next section. This is due to the endogenous nature of the preference for consumption flexibility.

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

120

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

Figure 1 Timing of the Model

Product configuration

Pricing (Pi); Purchase

Stage 1

Stage 2

Consumptions; Ux (c, s) resolved
Stage 3

where is the stand-alone value of consuming a

product compared to no consumption. Throughout

this paper, I assume that is large enough such that

in equilibrium every consumer buys at least one prod-

uct. Purchasing the different products together can

also be a desirable option if the benefits of preserving

consumption flexibility outweigh the associated pay-

ments. Note that measures the variation in the state-

dependent utility, and determines the degree of

future uncertainty. The relative flexibility value added

by the different k-type products to a purchased assort-

ment is jointly captured by both and .

I consider a three-stage game as shown in Figure 1.

In the first stage, the firms choose product configu-

rations, which then become common knowledge to

the market. In the second stage, the firms simulta-

neously make price offerings, P i, i = A B, and con-

sumers make their purchase decisions. The last stage

of the game involves T consumption periods, dur-

ing each of which the utility Ux c s is realized and a consumption decision is made. In evaluating the

purchase options, =

 cA cB cA&cB , con-

sumers take into account what will happen in all

future consumption scenarios. Consumers discount

future utilities at a rate of 0   1. Let us also denote

= 1 - T / 1 -  1. Given these assumptions, the

purchase utility for an option  is given by:

Vx

=

s s s¯

s

max
ci 

Ux

ci

s

-

Pi
ci 

(1)

where s = , s¯ = 1 - , and is the price coefficient that is normalized at = . This normalization re-scales the valuations for all alternative options (or corresponds to just a change in currency), which therefore does not sacrifice generality. Note also that this normalization is consistent with the literature in which the price coefficient is usually normalized to one. This completes the model specification. A summary of the model notation is presented in Table 1.
This model setup captures repeatedly usable products, e.g., computers. Preference uncertainty is present in each of the future consumption occasions. An alternative interpretation is that consumers ex ante know the percentage of times a product will be used in the T periods. One can view the current setup as endogenizing the ex ante expected usage frequency.10

10 I thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out. In this regard, the current setup captures both horizontal and vertical

Table 1 Model Notation

Notation

Explanation

Base model i x l t s
ci cl Ux c s
Pi
Vx
x~ x x xi
i
f Extensions
A PA cA
x

Firms i = A B Consumer type (preferred product location) Product location (product A at l and B at 1 - l¯) Spread of consumer heterogeneity States of nature ( s and s¯) Probability of the state of nature s (1 - for state s¯) State-dependent product type ( and ¯) Add-on value in a favorable state Stand-alone value of consumption Product of firm i = A B Product configuration of type with location l State-dependent consumption utility for consumer x of
product c in state s Price of product i = A B Elements of purchase options (  ) Set of purchase options ( = cA cB cA&cB ) Per-period discount factor Present discounted multiplier = 1 - T / 1 - Expected purchase valuation of consumer x for option Price coefficient (normalized to ) Cut-off consumer type between option cA and cB Cut-off consumer type between option cA and cA&cB Cut-off consumer type between option cB and cA&cB Demand for product i = A B Profits for product i = A B Salvage value of an unused product
Product line extension by firm A Price of product A Extended product A Add-on value in a favorable state ( or 0) Preference correlation coefficient

Under the consumption-flexibility interpretation, consumers' usage from an ex post perspective need not necessarily match the ex ante expectation. This is analogous to the fact that flipping a coin many times does not necessarily result in heads turning up half of the times. The model can also be directly applicable to products that cannot be repeatedly used and have only negligible residual value if not used promptly, i.e., perishables, fashion goods, or information services. In some cases (e.g., air and rail tickets), however, the unconsumed unit could be "salvaged" with some positive value, f > 0, through resale, refund, or "forced consumption." The forced-consumption case could capture the situation of, for instance, watching an on-site hockey game along with a football match on the same or close days. Nevertheless, it is shown in the next section that allowing for positive salvage value reinforces the main implications of the paper.
differentiation, where the latter is state-dependent. For example, a consumer may on average like a PC (a plane) more than a Mac (a train), although there exist circumstances when the latter is preferred.

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

121

3. Analysis and Results

3.1. Basic Case This section considers the basic case where the firms' product configurations are fixed: cA = ck0 and cB = ck¯1. The game is solved through backward induction. I first characterize the consumers' consumption and purchase decisions in the presence of preference uncertainty, followed by deriving the firms' demand functions. The firms' incentive to induce consumers to choose the multiple-buying option, cA&cB , is then investigated. Next, the equilibrium prices and profits are presented. It is established that a "flexibility trap" might exist in which equilibrium profits decrease with consumer heterogeneity if preference uncertainty is significant. I also examine the implications of allowing for positive salvage value for unused products.

3.1.1. Consumers' Decisions. Consider a repre-

sentative consumption occasion for a consumer of

type x who bought a set x  of products in the purchase stage. If x includes only one single product, the consumption decision is trivial and the

consumer simply consumes whatever is on hand.

When both products are available x = cA&cB , in deciding which product to consume, the consumer

has to consider the tradeoff between the (realized)

state-dependent value and the horizontal disutility.

A less-matched product may be selected if it is in its

favorable state. Consider first the case of t  , where

- x2t  - 1 - x 2t and -x2t  - 1 - x 2t for all

x  0 1 . This suggests that if is large enough, con-

sumption is completely state-driven: a product is con-

sumed if and only if it is in its favorable state. If t 

instead, consumers who like product A very much

x



1 2

-

/2t

keep on using it irrespective of the real-

ized state. The case is analogous for those consumers

close to product B's location

x



1 2

+

/2t . However,

consumers who are relatively indifferent between the

products

1 2

-

/2t



x



1 2

+

/2t

have their consump-

tion choice determined by the realized state, i.e., they

"switch back and forth" between the two products.

In anticipation of future consumption, a consumer's

purchase decision is thus influenced by his/her

willingness to pay for flexibility, which as the above

discussion suggests is dependent upon both the con-

sumer's location x and the relative magnitude of

to t. Given the prices charged, consumers who value

flexibility more will be more likely to put both prod-

ucts into their shopping baskets. Particularly, a direct

application of Equation (1) reveals that a consumer of

type x prefers purchasing product A over both prod-

ucts A and B if and only if:

- x2t - max - x2t - 1 - x 2t + 1 - max -x2t - 1 - x 2t - P B  0 (2)

It is seen from Equation (2) that the incremental

value of buying an additional product B increases

with x. So all consumers at x  x prefer purchasing

product A over buying A and B together, where x

equalizes (2). Similarly, the choice between prod-

uct B and both A and B involves comparing Vx cB = + 1 - - 1 - x 2t - P B and Vx cA&cB = + max - x2t - 1 - x 2t + 1 - max -x2t
- 1 - x 2t - P A - P B . This defines x , where all

x  x types prefer to buy product B only over both A

and B. Moreover, in deciding which single product to

buy, product A is preferred over B if and only if x  x~

where:

x~ = 2 - 1

+t +PB -PA 2t

(3)

When t  , the multiple-buying cut-off points, x

and x , can be simplified:

1- t- +PB

x=

(4)

2 1- t

+t -PA

x=

(5)

2t

Note that for any combination of P A P B there are only two alternative orderings of x~, x , and x as in (3), (4), and (5). In particular, if it turns out that no consumer buys both products, it must be that x  x~  x . If, on the other hand, some consumers at intermediate locations purchase two products together, we have x  x~  x . As the following lemma shows, this characterization of purchase decisions also extends to the case when t  v.

Lemma 1. x~, x , and x in (3), (4), (5) completely characterize the consumers' purchase decisions:
(i) If 1 - P A + P B  2 1 - , then x  x~  x , where consumers x  x buy product A only, x  x  x buy both products A and B, and x  x buy product B only;
(ii) If 1 - P A + P B  2 1 - , then x  x~  x , where consumers x  x~ buy product A, and x  x~ buy product B.

Lemma 1 highlights the endogeneity of demand expansion when consumers are concerned about consumption flexibility. It illustrates the role of competitive pricing in converting consumers' purchase decisions on an expanded option set to market demand, which can be either primary or secondary. In particular, if the charged prices are relatively low, some consumers who value flexibility more tend to buy both products together. The consumers who purchase multiple products tend to be relatively indifferent between the products in terms of horizontal location. In comparison, those consumers who have a strong preference for a particular product do not feel that the additional payment of buying the other

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

122

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

Figure 2 Consumer Purchase Decisions and Market Demand (i) Multiple buying: (1 ­ ) P A + P B  2(1 ­ )v

A 0

AB x

B

x

1

(ii) Single buying: (1 ­ ) P A + P B  2(1 ­ )v

A 0

B

~x

1

product is justified by the increased flexibility value.

The intuition for this is that those consumers with

indifferent location preferences have less to sacrifice

from product mismatch in switching back and forth

between the different products. In contrast, if the

prices remain high, no consumer wants to buy both

products together. It is in this case that the multiple-

buying option is not endogenously realized as actual

purchases.

Figure 2 characterizes graphically the consumers'

purchase decisions and the firms' demand under the

two alternative price regions as given in Lemma 1.

Formally, we can denote the demand for firm i as xi,

i = A B:

 x =

+t -PA 2t

xA

=

x~

if =

1- PA + PB 2 1- 2 -1 +t+PB -PA

otherwise

 1 - x

=

2t 1- +t -PB
2 1- t

xB

=

1

if - x~

1- =1

PA -2

+

PB 2 1- +t +PA -PB

2t

otherwise

Lemma 1 also implies that, if the prices are low, an increase in a firm's market sales can be driven by primary demand expansion, and the total market size can be enlarged even with a fixed number of consumers. However, when the prices are high, demand expansion is only secondary in the sense that lowering the price can only switch some consumers away from the competitor while the total market demand is fixed. Then, it is interesting to ask whether and how the marginal consumer's own-price and cross-price sensitivities differ across the two price regions. The following lemma responds to this, which is straightforward from a direct examination of the demand functions.

Lemma 2. When the market prices are in the multiplebuying region, for both firms, the own-price demand sensitivity is higher and the cross-price sensitivity is lower than in the single-buying region.

3.1.2. Firms' Pricing Decisions. Let us now inves-

tigate the firms' strategic pricing decisions. As we

see above, the nature of demand expansion and price

sensitivity differs across the two purchase regions.

Conventional wisdom might suggest that firms com-

pete less aggressively when demand can be expanded

primarily because the firms do not need to com-

pete head-to-head for fixed sales. Following the same

logic, one may also conjecture that price competition

is more intense and that the firms tend to undercut

each other when the market is characterized by the

firms competing for secondary demand.

However, this conventional logic captures only

local pricing incentives in one of the pricing regions.

It remains to be determined into which scenario the

firms fall in the first place. Because the boundary of

the regions is endogenous, each firm has to decide on

both the price region to compete in and on its optimal

pricing within that region. A firm might increase or

drop its price into an alternative region and thus uni-

laterally change the nature of competition. The search

for the price equilibrium is thus complicated by the

discontinuity of the firms' profit functions, i = P ixi,

i = A B. To characterize

define t3 = 1

t1 +

3=

/3 /

3 +t2=

th2e+p3ricin-g .

4equ/ili6b-riu3m,

let

us 

Proposition 1. The equilibrium prices and profits in

the base model are given by:

(i) For 0  t  t1, P A = A = - t , and P B = B = 1 - - t constitute an equilibrium where all

consumers buy two products;

(ii) For t1  t  t3, P A =

+ t /2, P B =

1-

+ t /2, A =

+ t 2/8t, and B =

1 - + t 2/8t constitute an equilibrium where some

consumers buy two products;

(iii) For t  t2, P A = 2 - 1 /3 + t, P B = 1 - 2 /3 + t, A = 2 - 1 + 3t 2/18t, and

B = 1 - 2 + 3t 2/18t constitute an equilibrium

where no consumer buys two products.

This proposition characterizes the conditions under which multiple purchasing is observed in equilibrium.11 When the spread of consumer heterogeneity t is small relative to consumption flexibility, the firms

11 Note that when t2  t  t3, one obtains two equilibria; in the other parameter ranges, the equilibrium is unique. For the purpose of simplification, from now on it is assumed that in any subgame including the pricing game, the single-buying equilibrium will be "chosen" when multiple equilibria exist because it leads to higher profits for both firms. None of the qualitative results is affected by this "pareto domination" selection criterion.

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

123

find it attractive to drop their prices such that some consumers buy both products together. The incentive to cut prices is supported by the lack of strategic interaction in the multiple-purchase region, and by the homogenization of the products when t is small. Moreover, it can be seen that the larger the preference uncertainty is, the more likely that the multiplebuying equilibrium is observed, since both t2 and t3 increase with and .
Next, let us look at how preference uncertainty and consumer heterogeneity might influence the firms' equilibrium profits across the different equilibrium regions. To this end, we can take comparative statics of the equilibrium profits:

Proposition 2. Under the multiple-buying equilibrium (i.e., t  t2), d i/d  0, and d i/dt  0. Under the single-buying equilibrium (i.e., t  t2), d A/d  0, d B/d  0, and d i/dt  0.

Interestingly, the firms' profits improve with in-

creasing preference variation under the equilibrium

when consumers are induced to buy multiple prod-

ucts. However, in the equilibrium when the firms

compete for secondary demand, only the superior

firm B (given the assumption



1 2

)

benefits

from

increasing preference uncertainty. The intuition is that

in this case, higher preference variability does not

increase total market demand but instead magnifies

the advantage enjoyed by the superior firm over its

inferior counterpart. Another interesting result is that

consumer heterogeneity has a qualitatively different

impact on equilibrium profits across the two equi-

librium regions. To understand this, one can use the

envelope theorem:

d

i
=

dt

i
+ t

i dP j P j dt

i=A B j=B A

The total effect of t on equilibrium profits can be decomposed into two components. The first term represents the direct effect, which is negative because increasing heterogeneity implies larger disutility from consuming a less-preferred product. The second term captures the (generally positive) strategic impact. As is well known (Tirole 1988), the strategic effect generally dominates the direct one in standard models of horizontal differentiation. Conventional wisdom therefore suggests that increasing consumer heterogeneity benefits equilibrium profits. This is confirmed by Proposition 2 in the case when t is relatively large such that the equilibrium is in the single-purchase region.
However, in the current model, when t is relatively small such that in equilibrium multiple purchases occur, consumer heterogeneity no longer plays the role of differentiating the competing products and thus of mitigating price competition. The strategic

effect fades away as a firm's payoff is not influenced by a small change in the rival firm's action. Moreover, in this equilibrium region some consumers purchase their less-preferred product, which they would not otherwise do in the single-buying case. The direct effect is thus more significant. Therefore, as consumer heterogeneity t increases from zero, at first it decreases the equilibrium profits. This results from the firms being unable to resist the temptation to reduce prices when the opportunity of expanding primary demand is sufficiently attractive. Hence, sales increase while equilibrium profits go down, constituting the central result of the paper, which is termed the "flexibility trap." To get out of the trap, t can increase up to the point where the firms in equilibrium compete for secondary demand. It is from then on that the strategic effect (endogenously) comes into play and that larger consumer heterogeneity leads to higher equilibrium profits. Figure 3 illustrates graphically the flexibility trap.
3.1.3. Positive Salvage Value f > 0 . It is important at this point to consider an alternative setup where the products cannot be repeatedly used and an unused product has some residual value, f > 0. This represents a broad set of categories, e.g., services. The salvage value could be achieved, for example, through refunds (e.g., air and rail tickets). Under this setup, the single-buying marginal consumer type x~ remains unchanged (Equation (3)). The multiplebuying cut-off points (Equations (4) and (5)) become x = 1 - t - + P B - f / 2 1 - t and x =
+ t - P A - f /2 t, respectively. As a result, the condition identified in Lemma 1 for the occurrence of multiple buying becomes 1 - P A + P B  2 1 - + f . It is then obvious that the qualitative nature of the demand functions is preserved, except that the multiple-buying region is enlarged. This

Figure 3 *

The Effect of Consumer Heterogeneity on Equilibrium Profits

"Flexibility trap"

0 Multiple buying

Single buying

t

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

124

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

increases the likelihood of observing the multiplebuying region. The main implications of the paper can then be reinforced under this alternative setup. In this regard, the zero-salvage-value assumption, which will be retained in the rest of the paper, is conservative in capturing the effect of consumption flexibility.
3.2. Horizontal Location Choice As we see in §3.1.2, when the firms are horizontally differentiated, they may fall into the "flexibility trap" in which equilibrium profits decrease with consumer heterogeneity. Then one may ask whether the firms can strategically reduce differentiation in order not to be caught in the trap. To answer this question, let us now investigate the firms' incentive for horizontal differentiation when they can freely choose product locations along the Hotelling line: 0  l  1 - l¯  1.
Differentiation decisions can potentially mitigate the impact of consumer heterogeneity on market interactions. This is because product locations affect not only the consumers' relative product preference on the horizontal attribute, but also the flexibility value of incorporating both products into a basket. As differentiation goes down (l or l¯ goes up), consumers on average incur less disutility in consuming either product and may therefore be more likely to consider buying both products together. This suggests that the firms can adjust their differentiation strategies to influence subsequent pricing competition. The firms' incentives for horizontal differentiation might be dependent upon whether the following market competition is characterized by primary or secondary demand expansion. To see this, note that, as Proposition 2 demonstrates, whether or not consumer heterogeneity t increases equilibrium profits is determined by whether the equilibrium is in the single- or multiple-buying region. Given the impact of differentiation on effective consumer heterogeneity, one may therefore expect that the firms may desire to decrease market differentiation if the subsequent pricing equilibrium is in the multiple-buying region.
Product locations also determine which equilibrium region in the subsequent pricing game is to be observed. As Proposition 1 shows, the lower the consumer heterogeneity is, the more likely the multiple-buying scenario is in equilibrium. Lowering product differentiation can hence increase the incidence that the firms switch from a single- to a multiple-buying equilibrium. Therefore, to solve for the equilibrium locations, we need to take into account how the firms' incentives for differentiation differ across the multiple- and single-buying regions, as well as which demand region will emerge in the subsequent pricing equilibrium.

(i) If t  max 4 1 + 3 / 5 + 3

min tA tB ,

a minimal differentiation equilibrium

l l¯ =

11 22

exists, where consumer multiple buying emerges in the sub-

sequent pricing equilibrium, P A = A = , and P B =

B = 1 - ; (ii) If t  max

1 + 3 / 3 + 

t¯A t¯B , a max-

imal differentiation equilibrium l l¯ = 0 0 exists,

where consumer single buying emerges in the sub-

sequent pricing equilibrium, P A = 2 - 1 /3 + t,

P B = 1 - 2 /3 + t, A = 2 - 1 + 3t 2/18t, and

B = 1 - 2 + 3t 2/18t, where ti, t¯i, i = A B, are

given in the appendix.

This proposition summarizes the conditions under which the well-known "maximum differentiation" principle may or may not remain an equilibrium if consumers are faced with future preference uncertainty. The results reflect the well-known tradeoff in differentiation decisions between the strategic concern of inducing more intense price competition and the direct effect of increasing market demand. As the firms become more similar to each other with decreasing differentiation, they will compete more aggressively in price. At the same time, moving to the middle of the horizontal line can also increase a product's overall attractiveness. In standard models of horizontal differentiation with single buying only (e.g., d'Aspremont et al. 1979), the strategic effect dominates the direct demand effect such that maximum horizontal differentiation is sustained in equilibrium. This result is also confirmed in this paper in the case when the subsequent pricing equilibrium involves consumer single buying.
However, firms may be engaged in minimal differentiation if price competition is absent (Tirole 1988, p. 287).12 In the current model, price competition might be endogenously absent if the firms are involved in the multiple-buying region. It is shown in the appendix that maximal differentiation is a dominated strategy if the induced pricing game involves consumer multiple buying. Moreover, when consumers care more about preference uncertainty than product mismatch, the firms in equilibrium have a strong incentive to minimize product differentiation. Intuitively, when the consumers' preferences for consumption flexibility are sufficiently significant, the firms find it worthwhile to induce primary demand expansion, which relaxes their concern for intense price competition. To cope with the "flexibility trap," the firms hence strategically decrease product differentiation to facilitate consumer multiple buying. In contrast, when preference uncertainty is not sufficiently significant, pursuing primary demand

Proposition 3. When the firms can choose product locations on 0 1 :

12 See Hotelling (1929) for a case in which the absence of price competition is exogenously imposed.

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

125

expansion is not profitable. The "maximum differentiation" principle is then recovered as an equilibrium outcome.
4. Extensions
The previous section establishes that, when preference uncertainty is significant, competing firms might be caught in a "flexibility trap" in which equilibrium profits drop and decrease with consumer heterogeneity. In response to this, one strategy that can be employed to evade the trap is through reducing differentiation. It would be interesting to explore alternative strategic instruments that can help the firms escape from the trap. To this end, in this section I investigate the role of product line extension as a trap-avoiding instrument. To further examine the robustness of the minimum differentiation strategy in helping the firms avoid the trap, the base model is also extended to consider consumer uncertainty heterogeneity and the correlation between the horizontal and state-dependent preferences. Finally, I show that the effectiveness of the minimum differentiation strategy is robust to allowing for endogeneity in the state-dependent preference structure.
4.1. Product Line Extension The base model assumes that each firm is endowed with only one product. In reality, the firms may actually produce a line of products. For instance, Apple offers two portable computer models, PowerBook and iBook, both based on the Mac system. One common rationale for product line extension is to fill up market "holes," whereas firms may also recognize that introducing a similar product to the rival's may reduce market differentiation. Within the current framework, it is interesting to investigate how these concerns can be used strategically to avoid the flexibility trap. To this end, let us modify the base model to address a firm's incentive to extend its current product. In particular, let us consider, without loss of generality, the scenario in which firm A is contemplating whether or not to introduce a new product A to the market, which has a different state-dependent value (but the same horizontal location) as product B, i.e., cA = c 1.13
Product A introduces some new considerations into the firms' strategic interactions. First, firm A is now able to serve the market with more product locations. This allows firm A to sell to more consumers without cutting prices too much. Therefore, product A's price tends to be higher in both the multiple- and single-buying regions than in the base model. This is the main effect of introducing product A . In addition, introducing product A has
13 Recall that the current products offered in the market prior to the extension are cA cB = c 0 c ¯1 .

a strategic impact that changes the competitive force faced by firm B. To see this, note that now consumers can achieve consumption flexibility by buying A and B together, over which they have the same location preference. Therefore, the strategic interaction between products A and B is driven mainly by consumer preference uncertainty but not by horizontal heterogeneity. Moreover, the co-location of products A and B limits their prices up to the flexibility value that they each can contribute.14 It turns out that the overall equilibrium payoff following the introduction of the new product A depends upon the relative importance of preference uncertainty versus consumer heterogeneity.
Proposition 4. Firm A's incentive to introduce the new product A increases with the importance of preference uncertainty relative to consumer heterogeneity. When consumer heterogeneity is sufficiently large, introducing product A is unprofitable even with zero introduction cost.
This result highlights the importance of gauging the relative importance of the main and strategic effects in introducing the new product A . When t is small, the strategic force between products A and B is driven mainly by preference uncertainty but not by horizontal heterogeneity. The main effect of product line extension then dominates, and firm A's overall equilibrium payoff increases with the new product introduction. However, when t is sufficiently large, the upper limit in pricing A and B is binding, which in turn has a negative spillover effect on product A. When this strategic impact dominates, firm A is better off not to introduce the new product. This proposition also implies that product line extension can be a substitute for decreasing differentiation in dealing with the flexibility trap. Essentially, introducing the new product A , which is co-located with product B, can save consumer disutility in multiple purchases. The firms hence can cater to the flexibility-seeking demand without cutting prices too much. Therefore, product line extension can be employed as a strategic instrument in coping with the flexibility trap.15
4.2. Uncertainty Heterogeneity and Preference Correlation
In this section, I modify the base model to investigate the robustness of the minimum differentiation strategy in assisting the competing firms to get out of the flexibility trap. The first modification captures the notion that consumers could be different in terms
14 As the proof shows, this implies that the maximum prices for products A and B are and 1 - , respectively.
15 An interesting empirical test for this proposition is to look at the correlation between consumer preference uncertainty and the length of product line in differentiated markets.

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

126

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

of preference uncertainty, i.e., the utility variability

across future states could differ across consumers.

This may imply, in the current framework, that

there is consumer heterogeneity in . For example,

a frequent internet browser might care more about

security issues than a game player might. Similarly,

people may differ in the perceived disutility of miss-

ing a flight. Specifically, let us assume that there are

two types of consumers: those who care about uncer-

tainty x = > 0 and those who are uncertainty neu-

tral x = 0 . Second, to facilitate exposition, let us

assume that

=

1 2

.

The

third

modification

allows

con-

sumers' uncertainty concerns to be correlated with

their perceived product differentiation on the horizon-

tal attribute. This may imply that the firms' position-

ing efforts have a "spill-over" effect on the products'

utility variability across different future situations:

Pr x =

=

1 - l¯- l

+

1

- 2

(6)

Pr

x=0 =-

1 - l¯- l

+

1+ 2

(7)

where  0 1 is the correlation coefficient. When goes to 1, consumer preference uncertainty is
perfectly positively influenced by horizontal differentiation. When = 0, the preferences are independent and we obtain a variant of the base model.16 The following proposition characterizes the firms' equilibrium differentiation decisions under these modifications:

Proposition 5. Given the heterogeneity in consumer

preference uncertainty,

=

1 2

,

and

when

preference

corre-

lation is sufficiently low, horizontal differentiation is mini-

mized in equilibrium if and only if consumer heterogeneity

is intermediate.

This proposition further illustrates the role of the flexibility trap in the firms' differentiation strategies. To see this, note that compared to the base model, the presence of uncertainty-neutral consumers could decrease equilibrium profits. Under maximum differentiation, equilibrium profits decrease with the number of uncertainty-neutral consumers if the firms are engaged in flexibility-promoting pricing. When differentiation is minimized, the more uncertainty-neutral consumers, the more intense the price competition is. Therefore, the firms' incentive to enhance differentiation increases with the preference correlation
. Nevertheless, as long as the consumers' horizontal and state-dependent preferences are not sufficiently correlated, minimum differentiation could

still be an equilibrium outcome. This would happen when consumer heterogeneity is intermediate such that maximum differentiation would catch the firms at the bottom of the flexibility trap.
4.3. Configuration of the State-Dependent Preference Structure
Until now I have assumed that the state-dependent preference structure is exogenous. In the base model, the products are essentially "differentiated" along the state-dependent dimension, such that all else being equal consumer preference reversals necessarily happen across future states. The reader may wonder to what extent the minimum-differentiation result is influenced by the firms' inability to choose the state of nature their product is suited for. If a firm instead chooses to deliver higher state-dependent value in the same state as its rival does (i.e., positively correlated state-dependent values), then consumer preferences would not be reversed across future contingencies.17 The flexibility trap could then be prevented even if preference uncertainty still exists.
In this section, I extend the base model such that the firms can configure their products along both the horizontal and state-dependent dimensions. Formally, let us expand the product configuration set faced by the firms in Stage 1 of the game: ci  ck0 ck1 ck¯0 ck¯1 , i = A B. The following proposition characterizes this extended product configuration equilibrium:
Proposition 6. Given the expanded product configuration set, if t  2 , there exist two equilibria where horizontal differentiation is minimized, cA cB = ck0 ck¯0 or ck1 ck¯1 ; if t  2 , there exists a unique maximal differentiation equilibrium, cA cB = ck¯0 ck¯1 .
This proposition again demonstrates the role of consumption flexibility in the product configuration decisions. When preference uncertainty is significant, one of the firms gives up the superior product type k¯ to guarantee differentiation on the statedependent dimension. At the same time, the firms are engaged in minimal differentiation on the horizontal attribute to facilitate consumer multiple buying. When preference uncertainty becomes less important, both firms pursue the superior product type k¯ while differentiation is achieved on the horizontal dimension. Interestingly, in all cases the firms never choose to be differentiated on both dimensions. Intuitively, differentiation is more desired on the dimension about which consumers care most.

16 Note that this is a conservative variant of the base model, since here there is half probability that consumers do not care about preference uncertainty.

17 Allowing for preference correlation as in the previous section partially deals with this issue by permitting, as a special case, the possibility of keeping the preference ranking fixed across future states.

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

127

5. Concluding Remarks
5.1. Summary This paper investigates the strategic implications of consumption flexibility. It extends the literature on consumer uncertainty by examining the impact of consumption flexibility on competing firms' marketing mix decisions. This paper produces several interesting findings that provide significant managerial insights into competitive interactions in markets characterized by inherent preference uncertainty. First, it demonstrates the relationship between consumers' flexibility concerns and market demand expansion. An endogenous mechanism is illustrated through which competing firms could increase primary demand even in a mature market. It also establishes the equilibrium conditions under which the firms may compete for primary or secondary demand. Specifically, it is shown that the firms in equilibrium compete for primary demand in markets with large preference uncertainty. These insights can benefit managers in diagnosing the sources of sales increases and in understanding the nature of price competition when consumption flexibility is an important issue.
In addition, this paper also explains why the firms' profits may decrease with increasing consumer heterogeneity although market sales are increased, a situation termed the flexibility trap. The strategic rationale underlying this result is closely related to the differential roles of consumer heterogeneity in the different competition scenarios. It is shown that when the firms compete for primary demand, consumer heterogeneity does not alleviate price competition but impedes demand expansion. This equilibrium relationship between consumer heterogeneity, preference uncertainty, market sales and profits can provide an interesting theoretical basis on which managers can check empirical data to improve their understanding of the forces underlying market competition.
Moreover, this paper sheds light on how to improve competitive positioning through effective differentiation strategies. It lays out the conditions under which a firm should follow the well-known "maximum differentiation" principle, or instead pursue a "minimum differentiation" strategy. It concludes that the latter strategy is optimal in markets with significant preference uncertainty. The rationale supporting the results is based on fundamental market characteristics, an approach deviating from the literature in which exogenous restrictions on the firms' pricing behavior are imposed, e.g., collusion (Jehiel 1992, Friedman and Thisse 1993) and price floors (Bhaskar 1997). The advantage of this approach is that managers can easily examine exogenous market conditions to determine their optimal differentiation strategies.

It seems that there has been a transition in the positioning strategy in the PC-Mac interaction. In the early 1990s, the Apple ad campaigns focused on the differences between the Mac and the Windows systems (Johnson 1992). However, "today hundreds of ways can be found where a PC and a Mac can get along with each other" (Blersdorfer 2004). Does this suggest increasing similarity in computer design based on these two systems, or does it just reflect the firms' endeavors to reduce perceived differentiation despite the systems' inherent differences, or both? The Microsoft 3D-graphics "Longhorn" operating system is making its debut, which is interestingly no longer named "Windows" but "taking cues from Apple" (Fisco 2004, p. 27). What is it in the Microsoft managers' mind that initiates this move? With the ever-increasing vulnerability of the Windows system to security attacks, one may expect that among many potential strategic and/or technological issues involved in this initiative, the positioning consideration investigated here could (or ought to) be an important one. The bottom line of the insights gained from this paper is that positioning a product closer to its rival's can be a profitable strategy in markets with significant consumer preference uncertainty.
This paper also extends the analysis to investigate the role of product line extension as a strategic instrument in escaping the flexibility trap. It is demonstrated that product line extension can serve as a substitute to the minimal-differentiation strategy in dealing with the trap. Finally, the main insights of the paper are shown to be retained under several model extensions, i.e., heterogeneity in consumer uncertainty, preference correlation, and endogenous configuration of state-dependent preferences.
5.2. Limitations and Future Research The proposed model has considered a special type of preference uncertainty with only two future states. As a result, the firms' product configuration decisions along the state-dependent dimension are constrained in the sense that the products' state-dependent values are either perfectly positively or negatively correlated. Future research can relax this restriction and look at more flexible preference uncertainty structure.
In interpreting the flexibility trap, the reader should be reminded that it is intended to capture the equilibrium relationship between profits, horizontal consumer heterogeneity, and preference uncertainty, where equilibrium profits might be unobservable to outsiders. Furthermore, firms might have been aware of the adverse effect of the trap and might have taken preventive strategic actions. As demonstrated in this paper, the set of strategies a firm can adopt to eliminate the effect of the flexibility trap include minimizing differentiation, extending competitive product

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

128

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

lines, or delivering the same state-dependent value as the rival firm does. On the flip side, however, the potential existence of the flexibility trap can help us reconcile such market phenomena as minimum differentiation and crowded competitive product lines.
We might seldom observe in reality either maximum or minimum differentiation between competitive offerings. Managers should not arbitrarily constrain themselves only on these two extreme positioning options; there is a continuum of intermediate choices. The reader should be reminded that there could be practical and cost concerns in implementing a particular positioning strategy, besides the strategic considerations investigated in this paper. There are also situations in which "de-differentiation" is not completely feasible, especially when the market boundary is broadly defined (e.g., air and rail as alternative transportation modes). Nevertheless, creative marketing programs (e.g., commercials) can be designed to influence the "perceived" positioning toward the desired direction (e.g., Southwest Airlines is perceived as more substitutable for rental cars than are other airlines).
From a theoretical point of view, a firm's differentiation strategy might be influenced by other industrial or institutional considerations, e.g., network externalities (Sun et al. 2004) and standard competition. Expanding primary demand through leveraging consumers' flexibility concerns is only one aspect of the competitive positioning consideration. There exists potential for future studies to gauge the relative importance of these alternative strategic incentives.
Another interesting direction for future research is to investigate the bundling and product line design issues under consumer preference uncertainty. Finally, it would be fruitful to investigate the dynamic effects of consumption flexibility and its interaction with other consumer choice issues, e.g., learning and stockpiling.
Acknowledgments This paper is based on the first essay in my doctoral dissertation for the University of California at Berkeley. I am indebted to my dissertation advisors, J. Miguel Villas-Boas and Ganesh Iyer, for their generous advice and invaluable guidance. Thanks are due to the editor, the area editor, and the reviewers for their valuable feedback. This paper has also benefited from the helpful comments of Tülin Erdem, Richard Gilbert, Teck Ho, Florian Zettelmeyer, and seminar participants at HKUST, Peking University, University of California at Berkeley, University of Toronto, and University of Texas at Dallas. A direct allocation grant funded by HKUST is gratefully acknowledged. Any errors are mine.
Appendix Proof of Lemma 1. If t  , then x and x are obtained
as in (4) and (5), respectively. It is straightforward to check that x  x~  x if and only if 1 - P A + P B  2 1 - ,

for any P i  0, i = A B. Then, part (i) of the lemma follows

immediately. Part (ii) is also similar.

Now consider the case when t  . If x  t - /2t,

then (2) holds for all P B  0. When t - /2t  x 

t + /2t, (2) is obtained if and only if x  x . For

x  t + /2t, (2) leads to x  x1 = 2 - 1 + t + P B /2t. Similarly, Vx cB  Vx cA&cB if and only if one of the following conditions is satisfied: (1) x  t - /2t and x 

x2 = 2 - 1 + t - P A /2t; (2) t - /2t  x  t + /2t and x  x ; or (3) x  t + /2t.

Note first that if P B  2 1 - , then t - /2t 

x  t + /2t and x1  t + /2t, which in turn leads to Vx cA  Vx cA&cB if and only if x  x . If instead P B  2 1 - , then x  t + /2t and x1  t + /2t. So Vx cA  Vx cA&cB if and only if x  x1. Similarly, if P A  2 , then Vx cB  Vx cA&cB if and only if x  x ; if P A  2 , then Vx cB  Vx cA&cB if and only if x  x2. One obtains part (i) immediately because 1 - P A + P B 

2 1 - implies that P B  2 1 - and P A  2 .

To see that part (ii) also holds, note that 1 - P A + P B 

2 1 - leads to x2  x~  x1. Then, max x2 x  x~  min x1 x . Part (ii) then follows. Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 1. Let us first look at the

region 1 - P A + P B  2 1 - . Firm A maximizes

A = PA

+ t - P A /2 t . Similarly, firm B solves for

MaxPB B = P B 1 - + t - P B / 2 1 - t . The firstorder conditions give rise to P A P B = + t /2 and

P B P A = 1 - + t /2, respectively. Then the (local) best

response functions are given by:18

PA PB =

+t

2

if 0  P B  1 - 3 - t and t  3 2

PB PA = 1-

+t

2

if 0  P A  3 - t and t  3 2

Note that in this case the response functions are flat.

Following the same procedure, one can obtain the (local)

best response functions in the region 1 - P A + P B 

2 1- :

PA PB = 2 -1 +t +PB 2
if P B  1 - 2 + 1 1+

- t or t  2 + 1

PB PA = 1-2

+ t + PA 2
if P A 

3-2 2-

- t or t  3 - 2

One can see that these response functions are con-
tinuous within each region but discontinuous across regions. Moreover, both P A · and P A · could be defined on 1 - 2 + 1 - t / 1 +  P B  1 - 3 - t /2, and P B · and P B · on 3 - 2 - t / 2 -  P A 
3 - t /2. So, over these overlapping price ranges, a firm
may want to increase or drop its price such that it can
compete in one price region over the other. To deter-
mine the deviating points, let us plug these response func-
tions into the corresponding profit functions to get the
local optimal payoff that one firm can obtain if it stays in a particular region. In the region 1 - P A + P B 

18 The boundary conditions ensure that the prices remain in the multiple-buying region.

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

129

2 1 - , a firm's profits are independent of the rival firm's price: A P B = + t 2/8t and B P A =
1 - + t 2/8t. In the region 1 - P A + P B  2 1 -

, these are given by A P B = 2 - 1 + t + P B 2/8t and

B PA = 1-2 +t+

in 1

Pj -

. Alsto. ,SimAil·arly,

A· B·

P A 2/8t. Note that if and only if P B 

1i+Pj

 B · if and only if P

increases
-2 - A 2 -

1 + 1 - - 1 - 1 - t. As a result, the global best

response functions for the firms are given by:



PA

·

 = 

2

+t 2- 1

0PB  + t + PB
2

1+ -2 otherwise

- 1- t

PB

·

  = 

1- +t 2
0PA  2 -1+ 1- -
1-2 +t+PA otherwise

1-

1-

t

2

Then, an equilibrium exists within

regiot nainf dand

only +t

if 

1 2

- 2

+t -1+

2 1-

the 1+

mu-lti2ple-b-uy1in-g

- 1 - 1 - t .19

This then leads to part (ii) of the proposition. Similarly,

part (iii) holds under the conditions given in the proposition

where the global best response functions cross each other in

the single-buying region. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 3. To prove the proposition, I first

solve for the equilibrium multiple- and single-buying profits conditional on given locations l and l¯. Several results are

then derived investigating the firms' (local) incentives for

horizontal differentiation in anticipation of competing in the

multiple- or single-buying regions. Finally, the equilibrium

conditions are identified under which the firms are engaged

in minimal or maximal differentiation.

Let us first solve for the pricing equilibrium. Compar-

ing the three purchase options yields the following cut-off

points:

2 - 1 + 1 - l¯ 2 - l2 t + P B - P A

x0 =

2 1 - l - l¯ t

1-

1 - l¯ 2 - l2 t - + P B

x=

2 1 - 1 - l - l¯ t

and

x¯ =

+ 1 - l¯ 2 - l2 t - P A 2 1 - l - l¯ t

where x  x0  x¯ if and only if 1 - P A + P B  2 1 - . Following the same procedures as in Proposition 1, one can
establish the following multiple-buying equilibrium: if 0  t  t, P A = A = - 1 - l 2 - l¯2 t , and P B = B = 1 - - 1 - l¯ 2 - l2 t ; if t  t  t^,

P A = P B = 1 -

+ 1 - l¯ 2 - l2 t
2 + 1 - l 2 - l¯2 t
2

19 That in equilibrium both x and x must be within 0 1 implies that P A  - t and P B  1 - - t . When t  /3, these constraints are binding. Part (i) of Proposition 1 then follows.

A =

+ 1 - l¯ 2 - l2 t 2 8 1 - l - l¯ t

and

B = 1 -

+ 1 - l 2 - l¯2 t 2 8 1 - l - l¯ t

where

t =

1 1 - l - l¯ 3 - l + l¯

and

t^ =

1 - l - l¯

1 + 3 3 + l - l¯+

1 - l + l¯ 

Similarly, the equilibrium single-buying profits are given by

A =

2 -1

+ 1 - l - l¯ 3 + l - l¯ t 2 18 1 - l - l¯ t

and

B = 1 - 2

+ 1 - l - l¯ 3 - l + l¯ t 2 18 1 - l - l¯ t

Result 1. Maximal product differentiation is a dominated strategy if the induced pricing game involves consumer multiple buying. Consider firm A for example. Using the envelope theorem, we have

d A l l¯ = dl

A l l¯ + l

A
P B

dP B dl

=

A l l¯ l

where the second equality is obtained from the fact that

x¯ =

+ 1 - l¯ 2 - l2 t - P A 2 1 - l - l¯ t

does not have P B in it. When 0  t  t, x¯ = 1. Therefore, P A = A = - 1 - l 2 - l¯2 t , which is increasing in l and l¯. If t  t,

x¯ =

+ 1 - l¯ 2 - l2 t - P A l l¯ 2 1 - l - l¯ t

Therefore,

A l l¯ = P A l l¯ x¯ l l¯

l

l

= P A l l¯

+ 1 - l - l¯ 2t - P A l l¯ 2 1 - l - l¯ 2t

Plugging in P A = + 1 - l¯ 2 - l2 t /2 yields

sign

A l l¯ = sign + 1 - l - l¯ 1 - 3l - l¯ t

l

which, when evaluated at l = 0, is positive for all l¯  0 1 .

Result 2. If t  8 , minimum differentiation

l

=

l¯ =

1 2

is a market outcome if it leads to an equilibrium pricing

game with consumer multiple buying. Note first that there

are two cases for the multiple-buying pricing game. If t 

t, all consumers buy both products and A B = -

1 - l 2 - l¯2 t 1 -

- 1 - l¯ 2 - l2 t , which is maxi-

mized at

l l¯ =

1 2

1 2

.

Note

also

that

at

l l¯ =

1 2

1 2

,

it

is

always true that t  t. Minimum differentiation is indeed an

Guo: Consumption Flexibility, Product Configuration, and Market Competition

130

Marketing Science 25(2), pp. 116­130, © 2006 INFORMS

optimal strategy in this case. If t  t instead, only some consumers make multiple purchases. Let us then differentiate

A=

+ 1 - l¯ 2 - l2 t 2

8 1 - l - l¯ t

and

B = 1-

+ 1 - l 2 - l¯2 t 2 8 1 - l - l¯ t

with respect to l and l¯, respectively. It can be seen that the first-order conditions are positive if t  8 .
Result 3. Nonmaximal differentiation can never be a market outcome if the subsequent pricing game involves consumer single buying. Differentiating the equilibrium single-buying profits

A=

2 -1

+ 1 - l - l¯ 3 + l - l¯ t 2 18 1 - l - l¯ t

and

B = 1-2

+ 1 - l - l¯ 3 - l + l¯ t 2 18 1 - l - l¯ t

with respect to l and l¯, respectively, one finds that the

first-order conditions have the same sign as - 2 - 1 +

1 - l - l¯ 3 + l - l¯ t and - 1 - 2 + 1 - l - l¯ 3 - l + l¯ t

respectively, which are negative if t  t^. The result follows.

Let us then look at minimal differentiation.

l l¯ =

1 2

1 2

is an equilibrium location choice if no firm wants to deviate.

Note first that, given t  8 , a deviation leading to multiple

buying is to 0.

is always dominated Moreover, if t  4 1

+an3dthe/o5n+ly3possibl,endoevsiiantgiolen-

bIfutying4eq1u+ili3brium/

5ca+n3be

sustained , firm

through deviating to A wants to deviate

0. if

and only if the equilibrium profits

greater than that with

1 2

1 2

,

i.e.,

The left side of the inequality is

with location

2 -1

+

5 4

t

increasing in

0 2/9t

1 2


t. Let

are
. tA

solve 2 - 1 an equilibrium

+

5 4

t

only

2/9t = .20 Minimal differentiation is if t  tA. Similarly, for firm B not to

deviate from minimal differentiation, we must have t  tB,

where 1 - 2

+

5 4

tB

2/9t =

1-

.

Similarly, for no firm to deviate from the maximal differ-

entiation locations, we must have

t



1 + 3 3+

2 - 1 + 3t 2  and
18t

1 - 2 + 3t 2  1-
18t
Let t¯A and t¯B solve the latter two equations, respectively. The second part of the proposition on equilibrium locations then follows.
Given the equilibrium locations, the subsequent equilibrium prices and profits in both the minimal- and maximaldifferentiation cases can be readily obtained as given in the proposition. Q.E.D.

References
Bell, D. R., G. Iyer, V. Padmanabhan. 2002. Price competition under stockpiling and flexible consumption. J. Marketing Res. 39(August) 292­303.
20 There are two solutions for the quadratic equation. Only the larger one is meaningful. This is also the case for tB, t¯A, and t¯B.

Bhaskar, V. 1997. The competitive effects of price-floors. J. Indust. Econom. 45(3) 329­340.
Biyalogorsky, E., E. Gerstner. 2004. Contingent pricing to reduce price risks. Marketing Sci. 23(1) 146­155.
Biyalogorsky, E., Z. Carmon, G. Fruchter, E. Gerstner. 1999. Overselling with opportunistic cancellations. Marketing Sci. 18(4) 605­610.
Blersdorfer, J. D. 2004. Help your Windows PC masquerade as a Mac. New York Times (February 26) 4.
d'Aspremont, C., J. Gabszewicz, J. F. Thisse. 1979. On Hotelling's "stability in competition." Econometrica 47(5) 1145­1150.
Dube, J. P. 2004. Multiple discreteness and product differentiation: Strategy and demand for carbonated soft drinks. Marketing Sci. 23(1) 66­81.
Friedman, J. W., J. F. Thisse. 1993. Partial collusion fosters minimum product differentiation. Rand J. Econom. 24(4) 631­645.
Fisco, R. 2004. Windows goes 3D; Microsoft's Longhorn operating system has a brand new look and feel. PC Magazine 23(12) 27.
Guo, L. 2005. A structural model of temporal and horizontal variety choice. Working paper, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Guo, L., J. M. Villas-Boas. 2005. Consumer stockpiling and price competition in differentiated markets. Working paper, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Hauser, J. R., B. Wernerfelt. 1990. An evaluation cost model of consideration sets. J. Consumer Res. 16(March) 393­408.
Hendel, I. 1999. Estimating multiple-discrete choice models: An application to computerization returns. Rev. Econom. Stud. 66(2) 423­446.
Hotelling, H. 1929. Stability in competition. Econom. J. 39(153) 41­57.
Jehiel, P. 1992. Product differentiation and price collusion. Internat. J. Indust. Organ. 10 633­641.
Johnson, B. 1992. Macintosh gets tough with Windows. Advertising Age 63(24) 4.
Kim, J., G. M. Allenby, P. E. Rossi. 2002. Modeling consumer demand for variety. Marketing Sci. 21(3) 229­250.
Kreps, D. M. 1979. A representation theorem for "preference for flexibility." Econometrica 47(3) 565­577.
McAlister, L. 1982. A dynamic attribute satiation model of varietyseeking behavior. J. Consumer Res. 9(2) 141­150.
McCracken, H. 2004. The more operating systems, the merrier. PC World 22(6) 21.
Roberts, J., G. Urban. 1988. Modeling multiattribute utility, risk and belief dynamics for new consumer durable brand choice. Management Sci. 34(February) 167­185.
Sarvary, M., P. M. Parker. 1997. Marketing information: A competitive analysis. Marketing Sci. 16(1) 24­38.
Shugan, S. M., J. Xie. 2005. Advance-selling as a competitive marketing tool. Internat. J. Res. Marketing. 22(3) 351­373.
Simonson, I. 1990. The effect of purchase quantity and timing on variety-seeking behavior. J. Marketing Res. 27(2) 150­162.
Sun, B., J. Xie, H. Cao. 2004. Product strategy for innovators in markets with network effects. Marketing Sci. 23(2) 243­254.
Tirole, J. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Villas-Boas, J. M. 2004a. Consumer learning, brand loyalty, and competition. Marketing Sci. 23(1) 134­145.
Villas-Boas, J. M. 2004b. Communication strategies and product line design. Marketing Sci. 23(3) 304­316.
Walsh, J. W. 1995. Flexibility in consumer purchasing for uncertain future tastes. Marketing Sci. 14(2) 148­165.
Xie, J., S. M. Shugan. 2001. Electronic tickets, smart cards, and online prepayments: When and how to advance sell. Marketing Sci. 20(3) 219­243.

