Vol. 23, No. 3, Summer 2004, pp. 304­316 issn 0732-2399 eissn 1526-548X 04 2303 0304

informs ®
doi 10.1287/mksc.1030.0048 © 2004 INFORMS

Communication Strategies and Product Line Design
J. Miguel Villas-Boas
Haas School of Business, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-1900, villas@haas.berkeley.edu
When selling a product line, a firm has to consider the costs of communicating about the different products to the consumers. This may affect the product line design in general, and which products or services are offered in particular. The problem is that firms have to communicate to consumers, possibly through advertising, to make them consider buying the products that firms are selling. This results in the firm offering a smaller number of products than is optimal when advertising has no costs. This effect is greater the extent of consumer confusion about the advertising messages, and is reduced by a greater ability to target advertising. When offering vertically differentiated products (second-degree price discrimination), under general conditions it is optimal to advertise so that one has a greater proportion of sales of a lower-quality product than if advertising had no cost. This situation also allows the firm to charge a lower price for the high-quality product and offer a higher quality of the low-quality product than it would if advertising were without cost.
Key words: communication strategies; advertising; product policy; product line; segmentation; price discrimination
History: This paper was received January 2, 2003, and was with the authors 14 months for 2 revisions; processed by Duncan Simester.

1. Introduction
When selling a product line, a firm has to consider the costs of communicating about its different products to the consumers. This may affect the product line design in general, and which products or services are to be offered, in particular. In this sense, firms sometimes prefer not offer many products so they do not confuse consumers. For example, automobile manufacturers offer a limited number of models or brands,1 manufacturers of consumer products offer a limited number of brands or packages, and banks offer only a few types of checking accounts rather than a continuum of them.2
Firms have to communicate to consumers, possibly through advertising, to make them consider buying the products that the firms are selling.3 If firms invest in advertising more products, they offer a better fit of each product to the consumer preferences and
1 Sometimes, when including the different potential options, one can have a large number of combinations. However, the combinations are all along particular quality dimensions.
2 One academic researcher in the beginning of her career did not want to circulate a paper outside her main area of research, to avoid confusing the market about her positioning. Communicating about this new area with only one paper would take effort without helping much in what the market considered her main area of research.
3 By "consumers considering buying a product" we mean that the consumers have that product in their consideration set. For evidence that consumers do not consider buying all products available, and that there may be substantial heterogeneity in the products being considered, see, for example, Newman and Staelin (1972) and Mehta et al. (2003).

can charge higher prices. However, advertising more products is costly and may result in consumers receiving advertising messages on more that one product, which could generate confusion. As noted by Wells et al. (1992, p. 247): "An important requirement of informational advertising is that the explanation be clear and relevant to the prospect. Consumers have little patience with ads that are confusing, vague, or unfocused."
When deciding to have a marketing program for a particular segment, a company has to make sure that the "segment should be the largest possible homogeneous group worth going after with a tailored marketing program" (Kotler 1997, p. 269). The firm can decide between undifferentiated marketing, where there is a single marketing program for all the market segments, and differentiated marketing, where there are different marketing programs. The extent to which a segment is "accessible" (i.e., the ability to target it with a particular marketing program) is an important factor in deciding whether to use differentiated marketing. Similarly, a company's decision of how many brands to have "involves gauging the trade-off between the value that the brand might create and the cost that it might incur" (Aaker 1996, p. 264). Firms also make different choices. For example, General Motors has more than 30 brands or subbrands (e.g., under Buick, Roadmaster, Park Avenue, and Riviera) while BMW or Mercedes basically each have one brand, with the models indicated by numbers (e.g., the BMW 700 series). At 3M the criterion

304

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design

Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS

305

for a new brand is that the segment of that brand be large enough to support the necessary brand-building investment (Aaker 1996). Similarly, one has to worry about how new brands may affect the sales of existing brands and the interaction between the brands or products (Urban 1969, Dobson and Kalish 1988, Wilson and Norton 1989, Shugan and Desiraju 2001). One way in which a new advertised brand may affect the other brands is by creating confusion for consumers about which brand best fits the consumer preferences. As noted by Keller (1998, p. 464), "Different varieties of line extensions may confuse and perhaps even frustrate consumers as to which version of the product is the `right one' for them. As a result, they may reject new extensions for `tried-and-true' favorites or all-purpose versions that claim to supersede more specialized product versions."4 This paper addresses these issues by looking carefully at consumer preferences, pricing, product design, and the costs of communicating information on the product attributes to the potential consumers.5
This tradeoff between advertising expenditures and the products-consumers fit yields a lower optimal number of products being advertised (and, therefore, being offered for sale) than when advertising has no cost. The lack of ability to perfectly target the advertising results in too much overlap in advertising expenditures. Firms may then find it in their best interest to advertise a smaller number of products. The cost is that there will then be a worse fit between products and consumers, which translates into the firms being able to charge less for the products. Under these conditions (less-than-perfect targeting) firms advertise a smaller number of products than they would if advertising had no cost. This effect is greater if there is greater consumer confusion about multiple advertising messages, and is smaller if the firm has a greater ability to target its advertising. Furthermore, one finds that there are circumstances where the firm chooses to offer both a specialized product targeted at only one consumer segment (with a high price) and a generic product targeted at all segments (with a low price). This is because the waste of advertising from a consumer receiving multiple messages is reduced by a lower advertising level of a specialized product.
In the general problem of product line design, the different products being advertised may be vertically differentiated (second-degree price discrimination). In such a case, one could think that the firm should advertise the products for which it has a higher margin more, that is, the higher-quality products.
4 This can also have particular effects in vertical product lines (Randall et al. 1998).
5 This confusion about the benefits could possibly lead to consumers buying multiple products (e.g., Guo 2003, Dubé 2004).

However, another important factor is that consumers who like quality more are still going to buy the lowquality products when they are aware of them and not the high-quality products, while consumers who have a lower preference for quality will not buy the high-quality products even when they are only aware of them. That is, more consumers end up buying the low-quality product than in a costless advertising situation for the same product line configuration. This gives a greater incentive to advertise the lower-quality products more.
In fact, if the firm wants to price discriminate between the consumers who consider both products, it is optimal to advertise so that one has a greater proportion of sales of the lower-quality product than when advertising is costless. In comparison to the case in which advertising is costless, the high-quality product sells for a lower price while the lower-quality product is offered at a higher price and higher quality.
The results of this paper are more applicable in industries in which firms communicating to consumers about product attributes is an important issue and perfect targeting of advertising is not possible. One idea that has been previously mentioned to explain the limited number of products offered by firms is the existence of fixed costs per product sold (see, e.g., Dixit and Stiglitz 1977, Iyer and Seetharaman 2001).6 Typically these fixed costs have been interpreted as production or setup costs. The point of this paper is that because of imperfect targeting, communication about the product's existence through advertising can itself generate specific costs per product through the relative convexity of advertising costs, which yields an optimal number of products to be advertised.
Product line design leading to consumer confusion can also have important implications on distribution channels, as discussed in Bergen et al. (1996). That paper shows empirically that consumer confusion about product assortments can lead to more retail differentiation (because the retailers adopt different subsets of the product line), less retail price competition, more retail service, and enhanced distribution. This argument may lead the manufacturer to create more confusion in the product line, in order to give greater incentives for retailers to advertise.
Also related to this work is the idea of economies of scope in building and using reputations (Wernerfelt 1988). The idea is that larger umbrella brands have more to lose (loss of reputation in more products) from having one poor-quality product. This could
6 See also Karmarkar and Pitbladdo (1994) for the role of common fixed costs for several products.

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design

306

Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS

potentially be a force toward having a smaller number of brands. This paper does not look at asymmetric information with respect to product quality; it instead focuses on the communication to create consideration of the products by consumers.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section presents a parsimonious model that illustrates the interaction between product line decisions and advertising. Section 3 considers the problem of the optimal number of products. Section 4 addresses the issue of price discrimination and advertising. Section 5 concludes and discusses how firms may find ways to overcome these communication constraints.
2. Product Line Decisions and Advertising
2.1. Preliminaries As an illustration of the issue of product line decisions with advertising, consider a market where consumers can be of two types. One type of consumer values product design A at v and values product design B at v - t. The other type of consumer values product design B at v and values product design A at v - t. Suppose that in the population of consumers, these two types are equally represented, each with mass 1. Furthermore, assume 2 v - t > v so that if a firm were selling only one product and advertising were costless, the firm would prefer to sell to both types of consumers.
The firm can choose to sell either product design A or B or both. The marginal cost of production for each product is zero. The firm cannot sell any other product designs.
For the consumers to consider purchasing one particular product design, they have to receive advertising about it. In what follows, we describe the effect of advertising in terms of consumer consideration about the products, which should be interpreted as a state such that the consumer will buy the product if the price is sufficiently low. This requires not only awareness about the product but also being convinced that the product will meet the consumer preferences.
The cost of making A percent consumers consider product A and B percent consumers consider product B is C A B , which is assumed symmetric, that is, C A B = C B A ,  A B. Note that we have 0  A B  1. Also assume that the probability of considering buying product A and that of considering buying product B are independent.7 Consider an advertising cost function such that there is never full
7 The case of nonindependence is briefly discussed below in §5. As argued there, the likely case of positive correlation reinforces the conclusion of a limited number of products.

consideration at the optimal communication strategy, i < 1, for all i.8 If the firm chooses i = 0, we interpret it as the firm
not selling product i. The question to be answered is
then whether the firm chooses to offer the two prod-
ucts or just one of them.

2.2. Main Analysis If the firm chooses p = v for both products, its profit is v = A + B v - C A B . The first-order condition is then iv = Ci for i = A B.9 The second-order conditions are just that Cii  0 and Ci2i  CA2 B. For the remainder of the paper assume that C · satisfies these conditions. They just mean that there are decreasing returns to advertising expenditures, and that the cross effects are not larger than the second-order own effects.
Consider now a firm charging p = v - t for both products. The profit is then v - t = 2 v - t ·
A + B - A B - C A B . The first-order condition for product A in an interior maximum is 2 v - t 1 - B = CA. The first-order condition for product B is similar. The second-order conditions for an interior maximum are Cii  0 for i = A B, and CAACBB - 2 v - t + CAB 2  0. In particular, note that this last condition can be violated while the second-order conditions for the price p = v are still satisfied. This is because for p = v - t, when advertising more than one brand the firm does not gain all the additional consideration of that product, because some of the new consumers considering any product were already considering buying the other product. This overlap of the advertising expenditures may then cause the firm to choose not to advertise one of the products. This result is stated in the following proposition.

Proposition 1. Suppose that CA 1 B > 2 v - t ,  B and that p = v - t for both products. Then if

CAACBB - 2 v - t + CAB 2 < 0  A B

(1)

the firm chooses to advertise only one of the two products.

This result only states that if p = v - t for both products, then one can have the firm advertising only one product. However, it is important to know under which conditions advertising one product is

8 The size of the market could potentially affect the advertising cost function, and therefore have an effect on the optimal advertising strategy. This issue is not explored in this paper. Note also that, as an alternative to receiving information through advertising, consumers could potentially learn about the available products through active search (Kuksov 2004). This possibility is not considered in this paper.
9 The term Ci represents the partial derivative of C with respect to i. Similarly, Cij represents the second derivative of C with respect to i and j .

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design

Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS

307

better than advertising two products and charging any price.
This is presented in the following proposition.
Proposition 2. Suppose that CA 1 B > 2 v - t ,  B and that condition (1) is satisfied. Then, if consumer heterogeneity is sufficiently small (small t), the firm chooses to advertise only one of the products.
This result shows that if there is a sufficiently small consumer heterogeneity, we will have just one product being advertised. The intuition is that if consumer heterogeneity is small (t is small), then, by charging a price of v - t for both products instead of a price of v when advertising both products, the firm gets greater demand with little sacrifice on the revenue per unit sold. Then by Proposition 1 we know that advertising only one product is better than advertising both products.
Note also that the greater the economies of scope in advertising, CAB < 0, the less likely we have condition (1) being satisfied. This is intuitive in the sense that greater economies of scope make advertising both products less costly. In the limit, when advertising two products is as costly as advertising just one product, we have that the optimum is obviously advertising two products.
Note that this result can be seen as showing that consumer confusion is endogenous to the product line design choice of the firm. If the firm chooses to advertise two products, it may create more consumer confusion, which then requires more advertising expenditures to achieve the same level of consideration for each product. Because of these additional communication costs, the firm may end up offering only one product and therefore reducing consumer confusion.
This result also illustrates that the location of the product line can be affected by the communications about the products. In some conditions the firm decides to offer only one product, and locates the product for the preference of only one consumer segment. If we also allowed the firm to position a product between the two products targeted for each segment, we could also have that the firm, when only advertising one product, would position its product between the two products targeted to each segment and would be able to charge a price greater than v - t.
If consumer segments are not symmetric, it could be that the firm chooses to advertise only the product for the largest segment at price v. Note also that with a slight ability to target advertising, a firm may choose to advertise only the product that is most appreciated by the largest consumer segment.
For the general case of additively symmetric separable advertising cost function, C A B = c A + c B , note that condition (1) reduces to c > 1 - c . That is, the advertising cost function

for each product cannot be too convex. Note that

the case where the advertising cost function is con-

structed by using independent equal messages and

only one exposure is enough for consideration (e.g.,

as in Butters 1977), we have c = a log 1/ 1 - ,

which has the property that c = 1 - c ; that

is, the firm is indifferent about advertising one or two

products. In this sense, in order to be optimal for

the firm to advertise only one product, one needs the

advertising cost function to be less convex than the

cost function for the case of independent but equal

messages.

One interesting possibility is that the cost of mak-

ing a certain percentage of consumers consider

the product is the same whether the firm advertises

two products equally or advertises only one product;

that is, C 0 = C 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - , because if

both products are advertised at A = B, the number of consumers aware of any product is 1 - 1 - A 2. Note, however, that this does not necessarily need

to hold because of potential economies of scope in

advertising both products, or because consumers can

become more likely to consider a product after a later

advertising exposure than after an earlier one, given

that they are not considering the product until then.

For example, denote by n the probability to begin

considering a product after the nth advertising expo-

sure given that a consumer was not considering the

product at the n - 1 th exposure. Then, the probabil-

ity of one consumer considering the product after n

exposures is 1 -

n j =1

1-

j . Note that if

n is

independent of n, then it is similar to the case of inde-

pendent equal messages, with one exposure being

enough for consideration (Butters 1977). If n is

increasing in n, then we get an advertising cost func-

tion that is less convex than the case of independent

equal messages, and the firm may gain more from

advertising only one product. Note that having n

increasing in n could be derived from a threshold

advertising effect, where consumers need more than a

certain number of advertising exposures to start con-

sidering one product.

2.3. Confusion in Advertising One important issue in advertising a product line is the possible consumer confusion about the attributes of the different products in the line. One way this effect could be modeled is through the idea that it is more difficult to communicate the attributes of one product if the firm is also communicating the attributes of other products. Denote by Ai the amount spent advertising product i. Then we could define
i Ai Aj , with i = j, as the fraction of consumers who understand the attributes of product i given that the firm spent Ai advertising product i and Aj advertising product j. The parameter , greater or

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design

308

Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS

equal to zero, represents the degree of confusion as seen below. Furthermore, if the firm did not advertise one product, then no consumer would understand the attributes of that product, i 0 Aj = 0 Aj , and more advertising for one product would result in more consumers understanding the attributes of that product i/ Ai > 0.
Consumer confusion about the advertising messages would then be defined by i/ Aj =
i/ Aj < 0, with  0 and i/ Aj bounded away from zero.10 Note then that a greater
is associated with greater consumer confusion, because for the same advertising expenditures, Ai and Aj , the fraction of consumers who become informed about the attributes of product i is smaller. Note also that greater advertising of Aj , for > 0, leads to a smaller fraction of consumers being informed about product i, greater consumer confusion, and this effect increases as the index of consumer confusion increases.
In terms of the notation above, note that if we invert the system of equations A = A AA AB ,
B = B AB AA , we get the advertising spending for each product that yields considerations A and B, AA A B and AB A B , and then we have C A B = AA A B + AB A B .
One can then obtain the following proposition:
Proposition 3. If consumer confusion is sufficiently large (large ) and if consumer heterogeneity is sufficiently small (small t), then the firm chooses to advertise only one of the products.
The intuition is that for a large index of consumer confusion, a firm, when advertising both products, has to advertise each product very intensely to compensate for the confusion created by the advertising of the other product. Then the firm may be better off advertising only one product and not creating consumer confusion. Even with an additively separable advertising cost function, one could interpret the nonexistence of economies of scope on the advertising cost function as the extra cost of consumer confusion about the advertising messages.
2.4. Targeting of Advertising If the firm has the ability to target its advertising to different consumer segments, then it may reduce some of the overlap of the considerations for both products and may possibly charge higher prices. To see this, consider an index of targeting ability such that if the firm gets 2 i consumers considering
10 Assume that there are decreasing effects of advertising, 2 i/ A2i < 0 and 2 i/ Aj 2 < 0. Alternatively, one could have a demand side characterization of confusion having to do with an imperfection in the fit signals received by the consumers. This alternative is left for future research.

product i, a fraction is fully targeted and is com-
posed of the consumers in segment i, and a fraction
1 - is composed of consumers of segments i and j in equal proportions.11 That is, of the 2 i consumers considering product i, 2 i + 1 - i consumers are from segment i and 1 - i consumers are from segment j. When there is no target ability, = 0, we get
back to the case considered above. When there is max-
imum targeting ability, = 1, all adverting of prod-
uct i goes to segment i.
If the firm charges the price v - t for either of the
two products, the profit function reduces to 2 v - t ·
A + B - 1 - A B - C A B . The equivalent to condition (1) is then CAACBB - 2 v - t 1 - + CAB 2 < 0. That is, if the targeting ability is sufficiently large, condition (1) is not satisfied and the firm is bet-
ter off advertising both products (instead of only one
product).
Consider now the effect of targeting ability on
prices. If the firm charges price v for both products,
it gets a profit of v 2 A + 2 B + 1 - A + B - C A B . Note that when = 1, the demand is the same as when the firm charges any other prices, and
therefore this profit is greater than when the firm
charges any other prices. By continuity we then have
that if the targeting ability is sufficiently large, the
firm decides to charge higher prices, while advertis-
ing both products. That is, greater targeting ability
allows a firm to charge higher prices when both prod-
ucts are advertised.

2.5. An Example

As an illustration of the results above, consider the

example of the quadratic and additively separable

advertising costs functions, C A B = a A + B +

b/2

2 A

+

2 B

with v > a and b > 2 v - t - a 12 For

p = v for both products we would then have A =

B = v - a /b and a profit of v = v - a 2/b. Given

the assumptions on C A B , note that we have

0 < A = B < 1.

Given this cost function, condition (1) reduces to

b < 2 v - t . Under this condition, if the firm charges

p = v - t for both products, it will only adver-

tise one product, say product A, and advertise it at

A = 2 v - t - a /b, and have a profit v - t = 2 v - t - a 2/2b. If condition (1) is not satisfied, we

have A = B = 2 v - t - a / 2 v - t - b and a profit of v - t = 2 v - t - a 2/ 2 v - t + b .

Under condition (1) one obtains that advertising

only one product at p = v - t is better than advertising

11 One could think of alternative formulations of targeting ability, for which advertising costs could be functions of the size of the consumer segments being targeted.
12 The condition b > 2 v - t - a is not crucial and only guarantees that when charging p = v - t and advertising only one product, the consideration of that product is less than 100%.

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design

Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS

309

both products at p = v or p = v - t if and only if 4 v - t 2 - 2v2 + 4ta - a2 > 0. The worst case for this last condition not to be satisfied is a = v, which reduces the condition to v - 2t 2 > 0, which is always satisfied. That is, under condition (1), b < 2 v - t , it is always better to advertise only one product than to advertise both products at either p = v or p = v - t. If condition (1) is violated, then comparing v -t with
v one finds that v -t is greater if t is sufficiently small. For t = 0 we have v - t = 2v - a 2/ 2v + b >
v = v - a 2/b, while for t = v/2 we have v - t = v - a 2/ v + b < v = v - a 2/b, and v - t is decreasing in t.
The intuition for the effect of condition (1) on the number of products to advertise is that if the marginal costs of advertising increase very quickly (high b), then the firm prefers to advertise different products in a small amount. On the other hand, if the marginal costs of advertising do not increase very quickly (small b), then the firm prefers to advertise only one product and does not "waste" advertising expenditures by making consumers consider both products.

2.6. Generic and Specialized Products

Under some conditions it may be endogenously opti-

mal for a firm to advertise a generic product priced

for all the segments and a specialized product priced

only for the segment that most appreciates that prod-

uct. Note that this can happen even if the two prod-

ucts and consumer segments are ex ante symmetric.

To see this, consider, for example, the case in which

the firm prices product A, the specialized product,

at pA = v and product B, the generic product, at pB = v - t. The specialized product is only bought by the consumer segment that most likes it, while the

generic product is bought by either of the consumer

segments. The profit for these prices is v v - t =

v A + v - t B + B 1 - A - a A + B - b/2 ·

2 A

+

2 B

.

From

the

first-order

conditions

for

an

inte-

rior optimum, one obtains

b v-a - v-t 2 v-t -a

A=

b2 - v - t 2

(2)

b 2 v-t -a - v-t v-a

B=

b2 - v - t 2

(3)

and the second-order conditions reduce to b > v - t. Note that under the second-order conditions we have that the generic product is advertised more than the
specialized product, A < B, because it can attract greater demand. To have an interior optimum we need the second-order conditions to be satisfied and b v - a - v - t 2 v - t - a > 0. Note that there are parameter values under which an interior optimum exists in this case (advertising both products) while the interior optimum does not exist (advertising

only one product) under pA = pB = v - t, which occurs under condition (1).
The optimal profit under (pA = v, pB = v - t) can then be obtained:

v v-t

b v-a 2+ 2 v-t -a 2 -2 v-a v-t 2 v-t -a

=

2 b2 - v - t 2

We can check that for t close to zero this profit is lower than v - t , as stated in Proposition 2. Consider now that condition (1) is satisfied and that v - a is close to 2 2 v - t - a such that the profit
v = v - a 2/b is close to the profit v - t = 2 v - t - a 2/2b. Then if b is close to v - t, we have that the profit v v -t is greater than both v and
v - t ; that is, advertising a generic and a specialized product is the optimal strategy. The intuition is that if the firm advertised both products for both consumer segments (at price v - t), there would be too much overlap of consideration of both products. The firm can reduce the advertising of one of the products, therefore reducing the overlap of considerations, but charging a higher price for that product because there is less demand to loose from charging a higher price. From an ex ante symmetric situation one can then obtain that the firm advertises both a generic (for all consumer segments) and a specialized product (for only one of the segments).
Figure 1 presents the profits of the different possible strategies as a function of b (the second derivative of the quadratic advertising cost functions) for the case v = 3, a = 1, t = 0 75. Let us consider the optimal strategies when b increases. For b small the optimal strategy is to advertise both products at p = v because advertising is not very costly (and advertising both products at 100% consideration). When b increases, it is better to avoid the loss in the overlap of advertising both products, and only one product is advertised at p = v - t. When b increases further, optimal advertising decreases, the overlap problem becomes less serious, and the firm gains from advertising at a low level an additional product at p = v while continuing to advertise the other product at p = v - t, the generic and specialized product strategy. Finally, for very high b, advertising decreases further, the overlap problem becomes even less serious, and the firm decides to advertise both products at p = v - t.
In Figure 2 profits for the different strategies are presented as a function of consumer heterogeneity, t, for v = 3, a = 1, b = 4 5. Consider the optimal strategies when t increases. For small consumer heterogeneity (small t), the lower price v - t is close to v and the firm advertises only one product at p = v - t. When consumer heterogeneity increases, the firm advertises less because the revenue from selling

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design

310

Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS

Figure 1 Profits for Different Alternatives and Optimal Strategy for Each b (Second Derivative of Cost Function)

(v) 1(v ­ t) 2(v ­ t)

(v,v ­ t)

Profits

Note.

0

Two Products

at v

One Product at v ­ t

j v - t represents the profit with j products with p = v - t.

b Two Products at Two Products

Different Prices

at v ­ t

a product is lower, and at some point the firm decides to add another product advertised at p = v, the generic and specialized product strategy. When consumer heterogeneity increases further, advertising is reduced so much that the firm decides to sell to more

consumers by advertising both products at p = v - t. Finally, when consumer heterogeneity increases even further, the effect of the reduced price of higher t is so large that the firm decides to advertise both products at p = v.

Figure 2 Profits for Different Alternatives and Optimal Strategy for Each t (Consumer Heterogeneity)

1(v ­ t) 2(v ­ t)
(v)

(v,v ­ t) (v,v ­ t)

(v,v ­ t)

Profits

Note.

0

One Product

at v ­ t

Two Products at Two Products Two Products at Different Prices at v ­ t Different Prices

j v - t represents the profit with j products with p = v - t.

Two Products t at v

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS

3. The Optimal Number of Products

Consider now the question of the optimal number

of products to advertise. Suppose that the consumer

preferences are uniformly distributed in a circle of

length one.13 If a consumer buys a product located

at a distance x from where the consumer preferences

are located, the consumer gets a utility of v - tx - p,

where p is price and t is a measure of consumer het-

erogeneity. Assume the mass of consumers to be one.

If advertising were costless, the firm would choose

to offer (advertise) a continuum of products, one

matching each consumer preference.14 Because each

consumer would have a perfect fit, the firm could

charge a price p = v. The profit being generated would

be = v.

With costly advertising (and imperfect targeting)

we may expect firms to decide to advertise a finite

number of products. Suppose that the firm adver-

tises n products, i = 1 n, a product i advertised

to obtain consideration i. Assuming additive separability of advertising costs the cost of advertising the

n products is then C 1

n=

n i=1

c

i . Assume

c > 0, and c 1 high enough such that no product

is advertised with consideration one.

Consider the pricing decision for sufficiently low

consumer heterogeneity.

Proposition 4. Given that n products are being advertised, if the consumer heterogeneity t is sufficiently small, the optimal price of each of the n products being advertised is equal to v - t/2.

If the consumer heterogeneity is sufficiently small, the firm prefers to set prices such that all of its products are attractive to any consumer in the market, that is, price at v - t/2. A higher price would lead to some loss in demand, but without much increase in revenue per unit because t is small. As shown in the proof of the proposition, a sufficient condition for t small can be written as t  v - t/2 1 - n-1, where
is defined by v = c . When consumer heterogeneity is not too small (larger t), the firm may set prices such that not all consumers receiving an advertising message are willing to buy that product. That is, and as shown in the previous section, the firm may choose to offer more specialized products. Furthermore, because the potential waste of the overlap of advertising messages is reduced by advertising some products less, it may be that, as illustrated in the previous section, the firm chooses to advertise and price a priori equal potential products differently.

13 For the case of competition with each firm carrying one product, see, for example, Grossman and Shapiro (1984) and Soberman (2001).
14 Note that a continuum of products is not possible if there is a fixed production cost per product.

311

To focus on the question of the number of products,

from now on let us assume sufficiently low consumer

heterogeneity.

Consider now the total demand for the n products

being advertised. The mass of consumers not consid-

ering any product for the n products

is

n i=1

is 1 -

1- i .

n i=1

1-

The total demand i . The total profit

from advertising n products is then 1

n=

v - t/2 1 -

n i=1

1

-

i

-

n i=1

c

i

Maximizing

1

n with respect to i one obtains v - t/2 ·

j=i 1 - j = c i . If c is larger than v - t/2

the second-order conditions are satisfied and the opti-

mum is symmetric with 1 = 2 = · · · = n = . The objective function becomes then n = v - t/2 ·

1 - 1 - n - nc . From the first-order condition

with respect to n one obtains

1- n=

c

and

v - t/2 log 1/ 1 -

n = log

c

v - t/2 log 1/ 1 -

1 log 1 -

Substituting into n one obtains that the problem becomes maxz v - t/2 1 - z + z log z , where z  c / v - t/2 log 1/ 1 - . Because 0  z  1 we know that the objective function above is decreasing in z. Then the optimum can be obtained by min c / log 1/ 1 - . This can be seen as finding the efficient advertising amount, given that there is overlap of the advertising messages. From these conditions one can obtain that the amount of advertising for each product is independent of the parameters of consumer heterogeneity, t, and the maximum valuation for the product, v.

Proposition 5. In an interior optimum the amount of advertising for each product is independent of t and v and is given by

1 - c log 1 - + c = 0

(4)

This means that when we have an interior optimum all the adjustment to changes in the consumer heterogeneity or in the product valuation is done through the number of products being advertised. Note now that the case where the advertising cost function is constructed by using independent equal messages with one exposure being enough for consideration (e.g., as in Butters 1977) we have c = a log 1/ 1 - for which condition (4) is satisfied for any . For each there is an optimal number of products, n. Note that for this advertising cost function when we make tend to zero, the optimal number of products goes to infinity while the total expenditures in advertising remains constant.15

15 Proposition 4 continues to hold when the number of products goes to infinity. This is immediate for t = 0, and the result can also be obtained for t > 0 but small.

312

Note that by perturbing the advertising cost function away from this one, one gets that (4) is not satisfied for all There are some c for which condition (4) is only satisfied at = 0 which means that at the optimum there is an infinite number of products being advertised. A sufficient condition for to be strictly positive and the optimal number of products to be finite is c 0 > c 0 because the limit when goes to zero of the first-order condition is negative under this condition,

c lim
0

log 1/ 1 - - c / 1 -

c 0 -c 0

log 1/ 1 - 2

=

2

For example, this condition is satisfied for c = a + b/ 1 - and a > b. For this advertising cost function one can also obtain that the optimal advertising per product is positive and with consideration less than 100%. Finally, note that the optimal number of products is increasing in the price v - t/2 and decreasing in the optimal . When the revenue per unit increases, the firm wants to advertise a greater number of products. When the optimal amount of advertising per product increases, the firm can reach a similar number of consumers by advertising a smaller number of products. Because the optimal amount of advertising per product is decreasing in the convexity of the advertising cost function, the optimal number of products decreases with lower convexity of the advertising cost function.

4. Price Discrimination and Advertising
Another important issue to consider is that when firms sell vertically differentiated products they may want to change the product design because of advertising considerations. Moreover, in such a setting it may be important to understand which factors determine which products are advertised more intensely. Suppose that consumers have net utility, U = V q - p, where determines the relative preference for quality, q represents quality (or quantity), and p is price. Assume Vq > 0, consumers like products with greater quality,16 V 0 = 0, the gross utility of a product of zero quality is zero, V q > 0, consumers with greater have a greater marginal utility for quality, and Vqq < 0, consumers have a decreasing marginal utility for quality. Suppose that there are two types of consumers, 1 and 2, with
2 > 1, and with proportions N1 and N2, respectively N1 + N2 = 1 . Each consumer has private information on but the firm can offer different products for consumers to self-select (Mussa and Rosen 1978, Moorthy

16 The term Fx means partial derivative of F with respect to x.

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS
1984).17 Denote product i as the product targeted at the i consumers, with i = 1 2. Producing one unit of product of quality q has a cost of gq 18
Suppose also that consumers are initially not considering buying either of the products but can be made to consider either through advertising. Denote the chosen consideration for product i as i, which can be achieved at cost c i . Suppose for now that the 1 consumers never buy product 2, even when only considering that product, and that the firm wants the 2 consumers to buy product 2 when they are aware of both products.19
If consumers have both products in their consideration set, they will buy the product targeted to their type. This yields the standard incentive compatibility (IC) and individual rationality (IR) constraints (presented in the appendix). The proportion of consumers that has both products in their consideration set is 1 2. Note that any type of consumer considering only product 1 will buy that product because for type 1 this is guaranteed by its IR constraint, and for type 2 this is implied by the IR constraint for type 1 and V > 0. The proportion of consumers considering only product 1 is 1 1 - 2 .
By assumption for this case, only the 2 consumers buy if consumers consider only product 2. This means that V 1 q2 - p2 < 0. The proportion of consumers who consider only product 2 is 2 1 - 1 . Because of the IC for type 2, the IR for type 1, and V > 0, we know that the IR for type 2 is not binding. Furthermore, because we assumed V 1 q2 - p2 < 0, we have that the IC for type 1 is not binding. We will have the IR for type 1 binding, because otherwise the firm would gain from increasing p1 and we will have the IC for type 2 binding because otherwise the firm would gain from increasing p2. These binding constraints are exactly as in the traditional second-degree price discrimination problem with costless advertising (Mussa and Rosen 1978). Substituting for the binding constraints we have p1 = V 1 q1 and p2 = V 2 q2 -V 2 q1 +V 1 q1 . One can then use these expressions to rewrite the problem of the firm (presented in appendix). Note that because the firm is choosing both advertising and product qualities, it
17 See also Villas-Boas and Schmidt-Mohr (1999) and Desai (2001) for the case of selling a product line under competition, or VillasBoas (1998) for the case of a distribution channel. In a different setting, Shugan (1989) also considers the question of the optimal product line in an oligopoly where firms are vertically differentiated.
18 Similar results can be obtained by assuming that the unit cost of a product is convex in quality.
19 The cases where 1 consumers may buy product 2 and where 2 consumers only buy product 2 when only aware of that product are discussed below.

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design

Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS

313

does not matter whether these are chosen sequentially or simultaneously. The first-order conditions with respect to q1 and q2 then yield

Vq 2 q2 = g

(5)

1 N1 + 1 - 2 N2 Vq 1 q1 - g
2

- N2 Vq 2 q1 - Vq 1 q1 = 0

(6)

Note that the optimal q2 is the efficient one, such that the marginal utility is equal to the marginal cost
of quality. Furthermore, by (6), the optimal quality
for the lower-quality product, q1, is distorted downward and is less than the efficient one. These results
are as in the traditional case with costless advertising
(Mussa and Rosen 1978). More interestingly, from (6),
the distortion on q1 is greater the more the firm advertises the high-quality product and the less it adver-
tises the lower-quality product. Therefore, note that
when one increases the advertising expenditures on
the lower-quality product or decreases the advertis-
ing expenditures on the higher-quality product, the
margin of the lower-quality product, V 1 q1 - gq1, is increased, and the margin of the higher-quality prod-
uct, V 2 q2 - V 2 q1 + V 1 q1 - gq2, is decreased. Consider now the first-order conditions with re-
spect to the advertising intensities of both products,
1 and 2. To simplify notation denote the margins of both products as, respectively, m1  V 1 q1 - gq1 and m2  V 2 q2 - V 2 q1 + V 1 q1 - gq2. These first-order conditions are

N1 + 1 - 2 N2 m1 = c 1

(7)

-N2 1m1 + N2m2 = c 2

(8)

The second-order conditions of this problem given
m1 and m2 are satisfied if c > m1N2,  , which is assumed. If the function c is not too convex, low
c , then the second-order conditions will not be sat-
isfied and we end up in the same case as in Proposi-
tion 2 above, with the firm choosing to advertise only
one product. If there is little consumer heterogeneity,
1 close to 2, that product is priced to be attractive to both consumer segments.
From (7) one can obtain 2 = m1 - c 1 /m1N2, which we can substitute in (8) to obtain N2m2 - N2m1 1 = c m1 - c 1 /m1N2 . Totally differentiating this equation with respect to 1 and each mi one obtains that advertising the lower-quality prod-
uct, 1, is increasing in the margin of that product and decreasing in the margin of the higher-quality
product. Similarly, one can obtain that advertising the
higher-quality product is increasing in the margin of
the higher-quality product and decreasing in the mar-
gin of the lower-quality product.

Subtracting (7) from (8) one obtains c 1 - c 2 - m1N2 1 - 2 = m1 - N2m2, which can be written as 1 - 2 c 12 - m1N2 = m1 - N2m2, where 12 is a number between 1 and 2. Noting that by the assumption on the second-order conditions, c 12 > m1N2, we then have the following results on which product should be advertised more intensely.
Proposition 6. The lower-quality product should be advertised more intensely if and only if m1 > N2m2.
This result shows that which product is advertised more depends on the size of its margin and on the size of the high type segment. Interestingly, the product with the lower margin, the lower-quality product, can be advertised more intensely. For example, if the margins are not too different, the firm chooses to advertise the lower-quality product more. The intuition for this result is that the consumers who appreciate more quality will also buy the lower-quality product when only considering that product, while the consumers who appreciate quality less do not buy the higher-quality product if they are only considering that product. That is, the low-quality product is also sold to the consumers who appreciate quality more, while the high-quality product is never sold to the consumers who appreciate quality less. This gives a greater incentive to advertise the lower-quality product. Note that the condition in the proposition will occur when 2 - 1 is small enough. Comparing the incentives to distort the lower-quality product with the case in which advertising is costless, one finds that if the preferences across consumers are not too different, then costly advertising causes the quality of the lower-quality product to be less distorted.
Proposition 7. If m1 > N2m2, then costly advertising causes the quality of the lower-quality product to be less distorted from the efficient one in comparison to the case in which advertising is costless.
This proposition then implies that, with costly advertising, if the consumer preferences are relatively similar, then the firm gets a greater margin from the lower-quality product and lowers the price of the higher-quality product in comparison to the case of costless advertising. Note that even if m1 < N2m2, one may still get less quality distortion under costly advertising than under costless advertising. To solve for the optimum one has to consider (5), (6), (7), and (8) together. One can then obtain comparative statics on the proportion of consumers who have a higher preference for quality and on the similarity of consumer preferences.
Proposition 8. Consider c · large. Then the margin and the advertising intensity on the lower-quality product, m1 and 1 respectively, are decreasing in the proportion of consumers who have a higher preference for

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design

314

Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS

quality, N2. Similarly, the margin and the advertising intensity on the higher-quality product, m2 and 2 respectively, are increasing in N2.
This proposition gets the expected result: When the proportion of consumers who most appreciate quality increases, the firm distorts the lower-quality product more, generating a lower margin for the lower-quality product and a higher margin for the higher-quality product. At the same time the firm decreases advertising for the lower-quality product and increases advertising for the higher-quality product.
Suppose now that the firm decides to offer a product such that the 1 consumers may also buy product 2 This means that V 1 q2 - p2  0. It can then be seen that at the optimum p2 = V 1 q2 , which yields that the optimal q1 and q2 are determined by Vq 1 q = g, that is, q1 = q2 and p1 = p2. This means that the firm decides to offer only one product. This will happen when the proportion of 2 consumers, N2, is high and 1 is close to 2. This case is a particular case of the firm's problem above.
Finally, another possibility is that the firm chooses to offer product 2 at a price such that the 2 consumers only buy that product when they are aware of product 2 and unaware of product 1. In this case the firm would not need to worry about the IC constraint for type 2 and would charge p2 = V 2 q2 . The quality levels being offered would then be the efficient ones, Vq i qi = g, and the margins m1 and m2 would be at the maximum possible. Note that this can be potentially optimal if the increase in the margins has a bigger effect than the transfer of demand from the high-quality product to the low-quality product, which is 1 2N2. This can be the case if 1, 2, or N2 are small, or if 2 is much higher than 1.
5. Discussion and Concluding Remarks
This paper models the firms' costs of communicating to consumers the existence of their products and the influence of these costs on the optimal design of the product line. In particular, under some general advertising cost functions a firm may choose to offer a smaller number of products than the number of consumer preferences that exist in the market. The intuition for this result is that by advertising several products a firm is going to have some consumers consider more than one of these products, while buying only one of them. This overlap of considerations creates a greater cost in advertising expenditures, which is reduced when the firm advertises a smaller number of products. The firm has to tradeoff this effect against offering less fit between different consumer preferences and the products being offered, which translates to lower prices. This tradeoff

then determines the optimal number of products to be advertised or sold. Note also that if advertising messages for different products are positively correlated across consumers, then the results of a limited number of products being advertised would be strengthened, because there would be greater overlap of the consideration of different products.
There are, however, some techniques that firms can use to solve this problem of overlap of advertising effects. As noted above, better targeting may allow a firm to target each advertising message to the intended audience, therefore reducing the overlap and consumer confusion. Improvements on the profiling of the audience for different types of media allow firms to better manage the overlap and confusion of advertising, and therefore to offer an expanded product line that better fits the different consumer preferences.
Another technique that firms can use to deal with overlap and consumer confusion is to offer relatively few base models together with a range of options, thus allowing customers to tailor products to their needs. The description of the options can be communicated through a sales force after the customers understand their preferences with respect to the base models. While understanding their preferences with respect to the base models, customers are aware that they will be able to choose among more detailed options within each base model. The automobile industry is a good example of this technique at work, with dealers offering detailed information on different options.
Providing comparisons in a single advertisement may also allow firms to make customers aware of the products and their different features. Finally, the price level and the amount of advertising could also serve a signaling role to reveal the horizontal and/or vertical differentiation between products.
Note also that the preference for a product could also be a function of the products being offered in the market (e.g., Wernerfelt 1995). This is a potentially interesting issue that should be looked at in future research, as well as its potential interactions with communication strategies. In this paper this issue is only being included through consumers having or not having a preference for a certain product (whether that product is being considered by the consumers) and through the communication costs of having consumers consider a product or products.
In a setting where vertically differentiated products are offered in order to self-select different types of consumers, one obtains that because the binding incentive compatibility constraint is for consumers who value quality more not to buy the lower-quality products, then advertising costs generate less distortion of the lower-quality product. This is because

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design

Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS

315

consumers who value quality less buy only the lowerquality product, while consumers who value quality more have a positive surplus from buying any product. This brings the actual proportion of consumers buying the lower-quality product higher than when advertising is costless. This also yields a force for a firm to advertise its lower-quality product more.

Acknowledgments Comments from the editor, the area editor, three anonymous reviewers, Jean-Pierre Dubé, Ganesh Iyer, Dmitri Kuksov, and Surendra Rajiv are gratefully appreciated.

Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1. Because CA 1 B > 2 v - t ,  B, we know that at the optimum A < 1. Similarly, because of symmetry of C · we have B < 1. Then, because of condition (1), we know that an interior optimum does

not exist, which means that i = 0 for one i. Q.E.D. Proof of Proposition 2. The case of p = v - t and adver-

tising two products is already ruled out by Proposition 1.

Therefore, we now only need to worry about the cases of

advertising two products with at least one of them being

charged the price p = v. Consider first the case where both

products are priced at p = v. Define

 A

and

 B

as

the

adver-

tising levels satisfying the first-order conditions for the case

where p = v. Then the profit for p = v is

v =v

 A

+

 B

-

C

 A

 B

,

which

for

t

close

to

zero

is

strictly

smaller

than

the profit under p = v - t for

 A

 B

,

which

is

v-t =

2 v-t

 A

+

 B

-

 A

 B

-C

 A

 B

,

because

2

 A

+

 B

-

 A

 B

>

 A

+

 B

.

Now,

because

by

Proposition

1

we

know

that the profit for p = v - t under

 A

 B

is smaller than

the optimum profit for p = v - t under condition (1) (which

means only advertising one product), we have that advertis-

ing only one product is better than the highest profit under

p = v.

Consider now the case where one product is charged at

p = v (say product A) and the other product is charged at

p = v - t (say product B). Define A and B as the advertising levels satisfying the first-order conditions for this case.

Then the profit for these prices is v v - t = v A + v - t · 2 B - A B - C A B , which for t close to zero is strictly smaller than the profit under pA = pB = v - t for A B because 2 A + B - A B > A + 2 B - A B. Now, using Proposition 1, we have that advertising both products and

charging pA = v and pB = v - t is dominated by advertising only one product. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 3. Because t is small the firm

prefers to charge a price v - t for the products it ad-

vertises because it gets a greater demand. If the firm

only advertises one product, the profit can be written

as maxAi 2 v - t i Ai 0 - Ai , which is independent of . If the firm advertises both products, the profit

is maxAA AB 2 v - t A AA AB + B AB AA - A AA AB B AB AA - AA - AB . Using the envelope
theorem, we get that the derivative of this profit with respect

to has the same sign as 1 - B A/ AB AB + 1 - A · B/ AA AA < 0. Note that because i/ Aj is
assumed bounded away from zero, as long as either AA

or AB is not close to zero, the derivative of the profit is also bounded away from zero. Then, if either AA or AB is not close to zero, if is sufficiently large, the profit of advertising only one product is greater than the profit of advertising both products. Finally, if both AA and AB go to zero when increases, then the profit of advertising both products goes to zero, which is less than the profit of advertising only one product. Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 4. Consider the price for one product i, pi. If pi > v - t/2 then 2 v - pi / 2t i j=i 1 - j is the demand from the consumers who consider firm i and do not consider any other firm. By cutting the price to pi - dp, the firm loses something less than idp because of lower margins (because the maximum potential demand for product i is i) and gains at least pi 1/t i j=i 1 - j dp because of greater demand. Because the maximum a firm would advertise for a product would be smaller than defined by v = c (given that this is the case with the maximum possible price and the maximum marginal payoff for more advertising), the gain from cutting prices is greater than the loss if t  v - t/2 1 - n-1, given that the firm never gains from having a product with a price below v - t/2. That is, if t is sufficiently small, then the gain is greater than the loss and the firm is better off undercutting pi. Finally, as argued above, if pi < v - t/2, the firm can increase this price slightly without losing any demand and therefore raising revenue. Q.E.D.
Incentive Compatibility and Individual Rational Constraints in Price Discrimination Case

V 1 q1 - p1  V 1 q2 - p2

(9)

V 2 q2 - p2  V 2 q1 - p1

(10)

V 1 q1 - p1  0

(11)

V 2 q2 - p2  0

(12)

Problem for the Firm in Price Discrimination Case

max
1 2 q1 q2

1 N1 + 1 -

2 N2 V

1 q1 - gq1

+ 2N2 V 2 q2 - V 2 q1 + V 1 q1 - gq2

-c 1 -c 2

(13)

Proof of Proposition 7. From (6) the incentive to dis-
tort q1 under costly advertising is determined by the ratio of N2 to 1/ 2 N1 + 1 - 2 N2 . Under costless advertising the incentive to distort q1 is determined by the ratio of N2 to N1. Subtracting N1 from 1/ 2 N1 + 1 - 2 N2 one obtains 1/ 2 1 - 2 N1 + 1- 2 N2 , which is strictly positive given Proposition 6. Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 8. Consider a quadratic approx-
imation of c · , c = a + b/2 2, where b is large by assumption. From (7) and (8) for b large one obtains approx-
imately, 1 = m1 - a /b, 2 = m2N2 - a /b. Substituting into the objective function (with b large) one obtains

max m1 m1 - a

q1

b

+ N22 m2

m2 - a b

The maximization over q1 then yields that m1 decreases in N2 while m2 increases in N2. Substituting into 1 and 2 one gets that 1 is decreasing and 2 is increasing in N2. Q.E.D.

Villas-Boas: Communication Strategies and Product Line Design

316

Marketing Science 23(3), pp. 304­316, © 2004 INFORMS

References
Aaker, D. 1996. Building Strong Brands. The Free Press, New York.
Bergen, M., S. Dutta, S. M. Shugan. 1996. Branded variants: A retail perspective. J. Marketing Res. 33 9­19.
Butters, G. 1977. Equilibrium distributions of sales and advertising prices. Rev. Econom. Stud. 44 465­491.
Desai, P. 2001. Quality segmentation in spatial markets: When does cannibalization affect product line design? Marketing Sci. 20 265­283.
Dixit, A., J. Stiglitz. 1977. Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity. Amer. Econom. Rev. 67 297­308.
Dobson, G., S. Kalish. 1988. Positioning and pricing a product line. Marketing Sci. 7 107­125.
Dubé, J.-P. 2004. Multiple discreteness and product differentiation: Demand for carbonated soft drinks. Marketing Sci. 23 66­81.
Grossman, G. M., C. Shapiro. 1984. Informative advertising with differentiated products. Rev. Econom. Stud. 51 63­81.
Guo, L. 2003. Consumption flexibility, product configuration, and market competition. Working paper, University of California, Berkeley, CA.
Iyer, G., P. B. Seetharaman. 2001. To price discriminate or not: The endogenous choice of product-type in retail gasoline markets. Working paper, University of California, Berkeley, CA.
Karmarkar, U., T. Pitbladdo. 1994. Product-line selection, production decisions and allocation of common fixed costs. Internat. J. Production Econom. 34 17­33.
Keller, K. L. 1998. Strategic Brand Management: Building, Measuring, and Managing Brand Equity. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Kotler, P. 1997. Marketing Management. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Kuksov, D. 2004. Buyer search costs and endogenous product design. Marketing Sci. Forthcoming.

Mehta, N., S. Rajiv, K. Srinivasan. 2003. Price uncertainty and consumer search: A structural model of consideration set formation. Marketing Sci. 22 58­84.
Moorthy, K. S. 1984. Market segmentation, self-selection, and product line design. Marketing Sci. 3 288­307.
Mussa, M., S. Rosen. 1978. Monopoly and product quality. J. Econom. Theory 18 141­168.
Newman, J., R. Staelin. 1972. Prepurchase information seeking for new cars and major household appliances. J. Marketing Res. 9 249­257.
Randall, T., K. Ulrich, D. Reibstein. 1998. Brand equity and vertical product line extent. Marketing Sci. 17 356­379.
Shugan, S. M. 1989. Product assortment in a tripoly. Management Sci. 35 104­320.
Shugan, S. M., R. Desiraju. 2001. Retail product-line pricing strategy when costs and products change. J. Retailing 77 17­38.
Soberman, D. 2001. Informative advertising: An alternate viewpoint and implications. Working paper, INSEAD.
Urban, G. L. 1969. Mathematical modeling approach to product line decisions. J. Marketing Res. 6 40­47.
Villas-Boas, J. M. 1998. Product line design for a distribution channel. Marketing Sci. 17 156­169.
Villas-Boas, J. M., U. Schmidt-Mohr. 1999. Oligopoly with asymmetric information: Differentiation in credit markets. RAND J. Econom. 30 375­396.
Wells, W., J. Burnett, S. Moriarty. 1992. Advertising Principles and Practice. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Wernerfelt, B. 1988. Umbrella branding as a signal of new product quality: An example of signalling by posting a bond. RAND J. Econom. 19 458­466.
Wernerfelt, B. 1995. A rational reconstruction of the compromise effect: Using market data to infer utilities. J. Consumer Res. 21 627­633.
Wilson, L. O., J. A. Norton. 1989. Optimal entry timing for a product line extension. Marketing Sci. 8 1­17.

