Reputation in Marketing Channels: Repeated-Transactions Bargaining with
Two-Sided Uncertainty
Darryl T. Banks  J. Wesley Hutchinson  Robert J. Meyer
The Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708 The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 1400 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104 The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 1400 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104
dbanks@mail.duke.edu  wes@mktgmail.upenn.edu  meyers@wharton.upenn.edu
M arketing channel interactions typically feature three characteristics that have not been incorporated together in an analytic study: (1) the parties can do business repeatedly over time, often under different terms of trade (e.g., prices may vary), (2) the terms that the seller offers one buyer may be different from those she offers another, giving each interaction the flavor of bilateral monopoly bargaining, and (3) the buyer and seller come to the interaction uncertain about the valuations each holds for the good, but they do know each other's reputation for valuation. The seller might, for example, come to the bargaining table aware that the buyer has a strong reputation for being willing to pay only low prices, and the buyer might come aware that the seller is strongly reputed for high cost and is, therefore, willing to offer only high prices.
The latter characteristic raises an interesting question: When engaged in a marketing channel interaction, what type of reputation is best for a buyer or seller to take to the bargaining table? In this paper, we answer that question by incorporating each of the characteristics that typify channel interactions in a formal game-theoretic bargaining model. We determine how the reputations that buyers and sellers bring to the bargaining table affect their equilibrium strategies and payoffs.
Our analysis shows that, in general, the best reputation for the seller to take to the bargaining table is one that makes the buyer nearly certain in his belief that the seller's cost is high, a result that matches intuition. The best reputation for the buyer, however, is counterintuitive. We show that an increase in the buyer's reputed willingness to pay can actually cause the seller to offer a lower price. The best reputation for the buyer to take to the bargaining table is, therefore, one that makes the seller believe that there is a significant chance that he is willing to pay a high price. This result is new to the literature and brings with it immediate managerial implications that we discuss. Our analysis also shows that modeling the buyer as a forward-looking strategic player yields different results than does following the normal convention of modeling the buyer as a nonstrategic price-taker. We discuss why future research on channels and on reference-dependent utility theory should consider these differences. (Bargaining; Channels of Distribution; Game Theory; Pricing Research)

1. Introduction
Suppose that software giant, Microsoft, has an innovative new product, the marginal cost of which is high. They decide that the best channel for selling the product to customers is through retailing giant

Wal-Mart, and Wal-Mart highly values the product. As is typical of marketing channel interactions, WalMart does not know what Microsoft's cost is, and Microsoft is likewise uncertain about Wal-Mart's valuation. In other words, there is ``two-sided uncer-

0732-2399/02/2103/0251/$05.00 1526-548X electronic ISSN

MARKETING SCIENCE Ó 2002 INFORMS Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002, pp. 251­272

REPUTATION IN MARKETING CHANNELS: REPEATED-TRANSACTIONS BARGAINING WITH TWO-SIDED UNCERTAINTY

tainty.'' The firms are, however, familiar with each other's ``reputations,'' i.e., Microsoft's reputed marginal costs of such products and Wal-Mart's reputed willingness to pay for them.1 Consider this question. Will Wal-Mart wind up paying Microsoft a lower or a higher price for the product if it (Wal-Mart) has a strong reputation for having a low willingness to pay for such products?
By most definitions, this marketing channel interaction is a form of bargaining (cf. Lilien et al. 1992, p. 155). It may surprise the reader that existing bargaining theory does not answer the preceding question or many others that are important to marketing practitioners and researchers. This is because, as noted by Fudenberg and Tirole (1996, p. 419), until now there has been no analysis of bargaining situations that typify channel interactions--specifically, interactions in which the parties can engage in ongoing transactions with one another, i.e., ``repeated transactions,'' and each side is uncertain about the reservation price of the other, i.e., two-sided uncertainty.2 The answer to our question, which we present later in this section, may also be surprising.
Bargaining has held the attention of scholars in economics and business for many years. Its source of interest is natural because, in organizational markets, a bargaining process often determines the price and quantity of goods. Indeed, in many parts of the world, bargaining forms the dominant mode of all buyer-seller interactions, even in markets for simple consumer goods. It is not surprising, then, that the study of bargaining has been an important focus of the literature in marketing (see Lilien et al. 1992 for
1The most productive way to think about a firm's cost or valuation reputation is that it is a common subjective probability distribution over the possible values of its cost or valuation. For example, if you know Microsoft's (Wal-Mart's) cost (valuation) reputation, then you can associate a probability with each possible cost (valuation). 2The reservation price is the price at which a party is indifferent between accepting and rejecting trade in a single-period interaction. In this paper, we call the buyer's reservation price his valuation and the seller's her cost.

an overview of marketing contributions to bargaining theory).
Bargaining situations in which the parties have complete information about one anothers' reservation prices have been well understood for some time (cf. Rubinstein 1982). It is clearly a rare encounter, however, to find a business situation in which the parties have complete information about each others' reservation prices. Models of incomplete information take this into account, explicitly modeling a party's uncertainty about his or her opponent's reservation price as a fallible belief born of the opponent's reputation, and showing how these beliefs affect the bargaining process and outcomes (see Kennan and Wilson 1993 for a detailed review).
The key result of these models is that the bargainers try to signal to one another that their reservation prices may not be what the opponent believes. The seller tries to convince the buyer that her cost is higher than the buyer believes in an attempt to get the buyer to pay more. The buyer tries to convince the seller that his valuation is lower than the seller believes, in the hope that this will induce the seller to offer a lower price. Costly delay provides a means for the parties to credibly signal their reservation prices to one another, which facilitates the process of reaching agreement. These reputation effects have been tested in the marketing literature, and the tests have generally supported the models' qualitative predictions (cf. Srivastava et al. 2000).
An assumption of almost all of these models is that the terms of a given transaction are unaffected by any past or future transactions between the parties, i.e., these models consider ``single-transaction'' interactions. This limits their applicability because, in channel interactions for example (such as between a retail buyer and a manufacturer), each transaction may bring with it not just the immediate gains or losses that result from a specific agreement but also long-run implications. To examine such long-run relationships, we must analyze repeated-transactions bargaining. Two papers, Hart and Tirole (1988) and Schmidt (1993), have studied

252

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

repeated-transactions bargaining. Both consider the behavior of buyers and sellers in the restricted case of ``one-sided uncertainty,'' e.g., the seller knows her cost but is uncertain about the buyer's valuation, while the buyer knows both his and the seller's reservation prices. Hence, only the buyer has to worry about his reputation. The main finding is that reputation effects are stronger than they are in single-transaction interactions. That is, in a repeated-transactions interaction, a buyer with private information about his valuation tries even harder to convince the seller that it is lower than she believes (and vice versa if the seller has private information about her cost).
However, how often is it the case that in a channel relationship, only one party is uncertain about the other's reservation price or concerned about its reputation? Would one assume, for example, that Microsoft is any more or less concerned about its reputation than is Wal-Mart about its own? Despite the ease with which this question is answered, there has been no analysis of repeatedtransactions bargaining with two-sided uncertainty to show whether or not and, if so, how reputation concerns on both sides affect ongoing trade relationships.
In this paper, we analyze a formal game-theoretic model of repeated-transactions bargaining with twosided uncertainty to show how reputation concern on both sides affects strategies and outcomes. In our model, a seller with private information about her cost makes a take-it-or-leave-it price offer each period to a buyer with private information about his valuation, and the buyer may either accept or reject the seller's offer. We show that reputation concern on both sides does, indeed, make a difference. The price that Wal-Mart winds up paying can actually decrease as its reputed valuation increases. This result is new to the literature and contradicts those of onesided uncertainty models in which the buyer is never better off if the seller believes that he is willing to pay more (cf. Hart and Tirole 1988). The logic behind this result follows.
If Wal-Mart is strongly reputed to be unwilling to pay high prices, then the only thing that would cause

Microsoft to offer a high price is high cost. This is because Wal-Mart's ``tough'' reputation would cause a low cost Microsoft to expect higher profit from offering a price that is low enough that even a tough WalMart would accept it. In other words, if Wal-Mart has an extremely tough reputation, then a high price is proof of Microsoft's high cost. Now, because WalMart highly values the product, it will pay a high price if there is no way that it can extract a low price from Microsoft. And there is no way if Microsoft's cost is too high for it to profitably sell the product at a low price. So, proof of Microsoft's high cost means that Wal-Mart will pay a high price, and Wal-Mart's tough reputation creates just the right conditions for Microsoft to deliver such proof.
The balance of the paper is organized as follows. We introduce the model in §2. We use a formal game-theoretic approach to model the interaction between buyer and seller. Specifically, we model a multiperiod, multistage game of incomplete information. Our analyses reveal that optimal strategies are of several qualitatively different types. To understand these strategies, it is helpful to see how they arise in simpler situations. Thus, in §2, we also examine the actions that a myopic buyer and seller would take to establish some important preliminary results. The main analysis is presented in §3, where we derive the equilibrium paths of the game. The key to the analyses is understanding how different buyer and seller reputations lead to different strategies. Sections 2 and 3 are, therefore, primarily devoted to establishing the reputation boundaries that mark qualitatively different buyer and seller strategies and explaining the intuition behind the results. In §4, we discuss the players' optimal reputations, i.e., the reputations that lead to maximum payoffs. In §5, we discuss the implications of the results for marketing theory and practice. The discussions in the text describe the basic logic behind the results and their implications. Readers interested in details of the derivations of the results will find them in the appendices. Throughout the text, footnotes direct interested readers to the appropriate parts of the appendices.

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

253

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

2. The Model
There are many different sorts of business situations that can be modeled as repeated-transactions bargaining with two-sided uncertainty. In our analysis, we simplify this rich domain to two-period games. There is an opportunity for a transaction in each period. The key characteristics of each player, i.e., the buyer's valuation and the seller's cost, are exogenously determined, are the same each period, and are known with certainty for his own but only probabilistically for his opponent's characteristics. In each period, the risk-neutral seller chooses a price and the risk-neutral buyer accepts or declines the offer. The following stylized example introduces the model's basic setup (the formal model on which the following example is based is presented in Table A.1 in Appendix 1):
B represents a major construction firm. For a given project, B purchases plywood on two occasions: A first purchase at the foundation phase of the project and a second at the roofing phase. B can buy plywood from an internal source at a transfer price, v, that is one of two values, low, v2, or high, v1. The transfer price is the same over both phases of a given project but may change from project to project. Alternatively, B can buy the plywood from S, who represents a major plywood supplier, at the price S offers (if S's price is no more than the transfer price; the transfer price, v, thus represents B's valuation of S's plywood). B may accept or reject S's offer, but there is no haggling (or both parties appropriately regard any haggling as cheap talk). B knows his valuation but S does not. The current belief in the industry is that there is a b0 2 (0, 1) probability that B's valuation is high, v1. B knows his firm's reputation (i.e., he knows that S assigns a b0 probability to the event that his valuation is high).
Building on this setup, we next establish some preliminary results that will prove useful for our subsequent analyses.
2.1. Both Parties Are Myopic Assume that both B and S are myopic. That is, at the foundation phase of the project, they seek to maximize profit for that phase only, ignoring how

their decisions may potentially affect their payoffs at the roofing phase. As is standard, we assume that when B is myopic, he will accept any offer from S that is less than or equal to his valuation, the transfer price. Therefore, at phase t (where t 5 1 is the foundation and t 5 2 is the roofing phase), B will always accept a price, pt, up to v2. So S will never offer any price lower than v2. Also, the only price greater than v2 that S will consider offering is v1, because B will accept a price greater than v2 only if his valuation is v1, in which case he will accept v1. Which of the two prices, v2 or v1, is chosen by S depends on B's reputation entering period t, bt21, and on the cost, j, of plywood to S. Like B's valuation, S's cost is the same over both phases of the project but may change from project to project. The cost of plywood to S takes on one of two values, low, j2, or high, j1. S knows if her cost is low or high, but B does not. B does know, however, that the current common belief in the industry is that there is a b0 2 (0, 1) probability that S's cost is high, j1. S knows her firm's reputation. We assume that j2 , v2 , j1 , v1. This assumption says that a low cost S can profitably trade with B whether B's valuation is low or high, but that a high cost S can profitably trade with B only if B's valuation is high. This allows our model to capture a wide range of uncertainty in market conditions. From the seller's perspective, some potential customers are profitable and others are not. From the buyer's perspective, some sellers can offer surplus while others cannot. We believe that this is realistic because in real markets, the parties usually will not know ahead of time if the buyer's valuation and the seller's cost are such that trade will benefit them both.
For notational convenience, from here on, we will
use some shorthand when referring to the seller. If S's cost is low, then S2 will be used to refer to her. If her cost is high, S1 will refer to her. It is impor-
tant to remember, however, that there is but one seller in the model; S2 refers to her in the event that her cost is low while S1 refers to her in the event that
her cost is high.
If the Seller's Cost Is Low. S2 can offer v2 for a sure payoff of v2 2 j2, or she can offer v1 for an ex-

254

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

pected payoff of (v1 2 j2)bt21. Thus, it is easy to see that (a myopic) S2 will price high (i.e., pt 5 v1) if bt21 . b8, where

b8

¼

vÀ vþ

À À

jÀ jÀ

:

ð1Þ

If bt21 , b8, then S2 will price low (i.e., pt 5 v2), and she is indifferent between pricing high and pricing low if bt21 5 b8. In essence, a myopic S2 faces a choice between two strategies: She can either
``gamble'' on a high valuation buyer by pricing high,
or ``take the sure thing'' by pricing low. Our subse-
quent analyses will show that these two generic pricing strategies can be optimal for S2 even when
she is forward looking, but in many cases new strat-
egies emerge that are superior to both.

If the Seller's Cost Is High. For S1, offering the low price yields a negative payoff because her cost, j2, exceeds the low price, v2. Her best strategy, then, is simple: A myopic S1 always offers the high price, v1.

The Role and Evolution of the Buyer's Reputa-
tion. The mutual myopia that we have thus far assumed provides the easiest case in which to examine how the buyer's reputation affects the seller's pricing strategy and how his reputation evolves. We have seen that the best period t price for a myopic S2 depends on the relationship between the reputation that B brings to the table, bt21, and the threshold b8. b8 is an important boundary in all of our subsequent analyses, and we will refer to it frequently. From here on, we will say that S is ``optimistic'' in period t when bt21 . b8 and ``pessimistic'' when bt21 , b8. This means that a myopic S2 prices low if she is pessimistic and high if she is optimistic (and either low or high if bt21 5 b8).3 Reputation plays no role in the pricing

3The labels ``optimistic'' and ``pessimistic'' are used for convenience. The reader should not interpret them to mean that if the seller is optimistic or pessimistic, her belief about the buyer deviates from the norm. Rather, they describe how the norm, as captured by the buyer's reputation in the industry, b0, affects the seller's outlook. That is, the seller is more optimistic (pessimistic) about her odds of being paid a high price if the buyer's reputation for having a high valuation is stronger (weaker), i.e., if b0 is larger (smaller).

strategy of a myopic S1 because v2 is below her cost.
The simplicity of a myopic B's strategy (i.e., accept S's price if it is no higher than his valuation and, otherwise, reject it) allows the simplest demonstration of the Bayesian process by which B's reputation evolves from its period t prior, bt21, to its period t posterior, bt. If S offers the high price at the foundation phase and it is accepted, then S knows that B's valuation is high, i.e., b1 5 1, because if his valuation was low, he would have rejected this price. If, on the other hand, B rejects the high price, then S knows that B's valuation is low, i.e., b1 5 0. If S offers the low price at the foundation phase, its acceptance tells S nothing about B and his reputation is unchanged, i.e., b1 5 b0, because B accepts the low price whether his valuation is low or high.4
The Key Results. There are two key results in this subsection. First, because B's valuation and S's cost are not the same from one project to another, they both should be myopic in the second period of a project. Hence, the myopic results are, in fact, the optima of the second period of the interaction. Second, B's action in the first period may tell S something about him that she can later use. Suppose, for example, that: (1) S's cost is low, (2) at the foundation phase she is optimistic, and (3) B rejects the high price that S offers. At the roofing phase, then, S will not repeat that mistake! Having learned that B's valuation is low, she
4S's posterior belief, b1(), is actually a function of several arguments, but we will suppress the arguments unless they are needed for clarity. Equation (A.1) and accompanying discussion in Appendix 1, give the details of the function. The reader may be wondering: ``What does S conclude if B rejects the low price?'' Surprisingly, answering such a question can be rather involved, but in this particular instance it is not. Rejecting the low price is suboptimal for B whether his valuation is low or high, so such an occurrence tells S nothing. Her posterior belief is the same as her prior belief. More generally, such an occurrence is an instance of what game theorists have termed ``zero (prior) probability events.'' Given the occurrence of such an event, Bayes' rule provides no updating guidance. The most influential paper on how to deal with this problem is Cho and Kreps (1987), and in our analyses, we apply their Intuitive Criterion wherever possible to restrict beliefs following zero probability events.

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

255

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

will offer the low price and make the sale. Of course, a myopic S does not look ahead to the potential benefits or costs of this learning when she chooses her foundation phase price, and nor does a myopic B when he chooses to accept or reject her price. We next suppose that S is not so limited in her thinking, and things get more interesting.
2.2. Forward-Looking Seller and Myopic Buyer Assume that S looks ahead to the roofing phase when she sets the price for the foundation phase of B's project but that B remains myopic (i.e., he will accept any price from S up to his valuation). With foresight, S looks ahead and can see that a high initial price is not an all-or-nothing proposition. If B accepts the high initial price, then S gets a payoff of v1 2 j in both periods. Even if B rejects the high price, S still gets a second-period payoff of v2 2 j2 if her cost is low (and if her cost is high, she has learned that it was never feasible for them to do business). So, a forward-looking S2 can profit from what she learns from B's first-period response, no matter what that response is. When S's strategy exploits the ability to learn from B's first-period response, we say that she has opted for the ``learnthen-discriminate'' strategy.
If the Seller's Cost Is Low. To determine when the learn-then-discriminate strategy is the seller's best option, assume that S's cost is low and consider some first-period price, call it p9, that B will accept if, but only if, his valuation is high, which implies v2 , p9 < v1. If B accepts this price, then S will know that his valuation is high, she will offer v1 in the second period, and B will accept it. In this case, S obtains a payoff of p9 2 j2 1 (v1 2 j2)d, where d 2 (0, 1) is the discount factor. If B rejects this offer, then S will know that his valuation is low, she will offer v2 in the second period, and it will be accepted. In this case, her payoff is (v2 2 j2)d. So, the expected payoff from offering p9 in the first period,

and then basing the second-period price on what is learned from B's first-period response is
pðp0; jÀÞ ¼ ½p0 À jÀ þ ðvþ À jÀÞdb0 þ ðvÀ À jÀÞ 3 ð1 À b0Þd:

Of course, if S2 opts to take the sure thing, i.e., p1 5 p2 5 v2, she is assured a payoff of

pðvÀ; jÀÞ ¼ vÀ À jÀ þ ðvÀ À jÀÞd:

ð2Þ

It is easy to show that these strategies yield the same profit for S if p9 5 p1, where

pþ ¼ jÀ þ vÀ À jÀ À ðvþ À vÀÞd:

ð3Þ

b0

The value of p1 makes an important difference in the strategy that S2 chooses.5 Because B is myopic, if he will accept p1, then he will accept any price up to v1. So if S is going to offer a price higher than v2, the best price to offer is v1. This means that whether
S's optimum strategy is to price low in both periods
(i.e., take the sure thing) or to initially price high
and then price in the second period based on B's re-
sponse (i.e., learn then discriminate) depends on the relationship between p1 and v1. Figure 1 shows that a forward-looking S2 facing a myopic B will take the sure thing if p1 . v1. She will choose the learnthen-discriminate strategy if p1 , v1. S is indifferent between these two strategies if p1 5 v1.
The point where p1 5 v1 defines another key point of seller indifference. For if S2 is so pessimistic
that she prefers take the sure thing over learn then
discriminate when a high valuation B is certain to accept the highest of all prices (i.e., when p1 5 v1),
then she is quite pessimistic indeed! To see this,
5The precise definition of p1 is that it is the first-period price that,
if certain to be accepted by a high valuation B but certain to be
rejected by a low valuation B, yields the same expected payoff to S2 as does take the sure thing.

256

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

define b22 as the value of B's initial reputation when p1 5 v1, which yields

Figure 1

Effect of (Myopic) B's Reputation on Optimal Strategy for Low-Cost Forward-Looking S

bÀÀ

¼

vþ

À

vÀ À jÀ jÀ þ ðvþ À

vÀÞd

;

ð4Þ

and note that b22 , b8, as comparing Equations (1) and (4) shows. b22 is, thus, a critical boundary because what we have shown here is that if b0 , b22, then take the sure thing gives S2 a higher expected payoff than any other strategy and is the strictly dominant strategy for her if b0 , b22. b0 > b22 means that a forward-looking low-cost seller does not play it so safe in the first period even if b0 , b8 (recall that, if myopic, b0 , b8 means that she takes the sure thing). This shows that, compared to the situation if the seller is myopic, looking ahead makes a low-cost seller more aggressive in the sense that she is more willing to offer a high initial price to exploit the possibility that the buyer's valuation is high.
If the Seller's Cost is High. Because S1 cannot profitably trade with a low valuation buyer, she cannot increase her payoff by using what she learns from the buyer's initial response. As before, the only price that she will offer is v1.
The Key Results. The key results of this subsection are as follows. First, for S2, offering any price less than p1 but higher than v2 is less attractive than take the sure thing. So, S2 will never offer a first-period price between v2 and p1. Second, if b0 , b22, then S2 strictly prefers take the sure thing to any other strategy. Finally, as compared to being myopic, looking ahead makes the seller more willing to offer a high first-period price to exploit the possibility that the buyer's valuation is high.
To this point, we have kept the buyer myopic to establish several useful results. Due to his myopia, the buyer acted as a ``price-taker,'' always accepting the seller's price if it is no higher than his valuation, and has been oblivious to the potential benefits of managing his reputation. Moreover, because the only thing that has mattered to the buyer is how the seller's offer and his valuation compare, the seller has

not had to worry about managing her reputation either. In the remainder of this paper, we lift this restriction on the buyer's thinking and move to the more realistic setting in which both players look ahead. We will see that this makes a big difference, as in this setting reputation concerns dominate the players' strategies.
3. The Main Analysis
To derive the optimal strategies for the two-period repeated-transactions bargaining game in which both parties are free from the limitations of myopic thinking, we seek the perfect Bayesian equilibrium (PBE) paths of the formal model presented by Table A.1 in Appendix 1. A PBE requires that players' strategies be optimal given their beliefs, and beliefs are obtained from equilibrium strategies and observed actions using Bayes' rule where possible (Fudenberg and Tirole 1991). In this section we present the main PBE paths.
The notation and definitions introduced in the previous section carry over to the present discussion. As with the preliminary analyses, qualitative aspects of the strategies are strongly influenced by the reputation that B brings to the table, b0. Also, as before, the

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

257

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

qualitative aspects of the equilibrium strategies
change depending on the relationships between b0 and a small number of boundary values, b22 , b2 , b8 < b1 < b11. Unlike the previous section, the buyer is now forward looking. As a result of this, the
seller's initial and posterior reputations, b0 and b1, respectively, will also become important. In equilibrium, the seller offers a small number of initial prices, i.e., v2 , p2 , p8 , p1 , v1.
In equilibrium, S2 chooses one of the three generic
strategies described earlier: take the sure thing, learn then discriminate, or gamble. A new strategy
emerges for the seller if her cost is high. Facing a forward-looking buyer gives S1 reason to be concerned
about her reputation and, hence, she sometimes offers a price that proves to the buyer that her cost is high. Accordingly, when she does this, we say that
she has opted for the strategy ``signal high cost.'' Because the lowest price that S offers in period 2
is v2, it is a straightforward exercise in backward induction to show that the lowest price she offers in period 1 is also v2. Therefore, if B's valuation is low (i.e., if v 5 v2), he is a ``price-taker.'' That is, in both
periods, he accepts S's offer if it is no more than his valuation, v2, and, otherwise, he rejects it. If B's val-
uation is low, then, he is not really a strategic player--his choice of strategy in no way affects the outcome. However, if the buyer's valuation is high,
he has more options. Denote by y1 the buyer's strategy if his valuation is high, where y1 is the probability with which he accepts S's period 1 offer, and let yÃ1 be his optimal strategy. Unless otherwise stated, subsequent discussion of buyer strategy refers to the choice of y1, and we will not discuss the simple strategy that he uses if his valuation is low.
One of the important results of our analysis is that the buyer's choice of y1 can affect the prices that the seller offers. For example, by being willing to reject a high price, i.e., y1 5 0, the buyer can sometimes induce the seller to offer a lower price than she would otherwise. So, even though B makes no counterof-
fers, his strategy, y1, does have an effect on the outcome. This is an important result for the marketing
literature, because most models of buyer-seller interactions in marketing cast the buyer (whatever his

valuation) as a simple price-taker when there is no haggling. Our results will show that when the buyer has a reputation to manage (i.e., when the seller is uncertain about his true valuation), then modeling the buyer as an intelligent, forward-looking player reveals that he is not powerless in the interaction; the buyer is a strategic player.
We do not restrict the buyer to pure strategies (i.e., we do not assume that y1 must either be 1 or 0), so he may choose a mixed strategy (i.e., y1 may lie anywhere in the interval [0,1]) if doing so optimizes his expected payoff.6 Indeed, a fascinating result involves the buyer's use of a mixed strategy that makes high prices unattractive for S2. When playing this strategy, the buyer accepts a high price with a small enough probability to cause S2 to take the sure thing, which means that S1 can signal high cost by offering a high price. When the buyer plays this strategy, we say that he opted to ``screen the seller types.''
Table 1 is an overview of the main results, the ``pooling'' and ``separating'' equilibria.7
In the remainder of this section, we describe the logic behind the equilibrium results presented in Table 1. Detailed discussions of these results are provided in the appendices.
3.1. A Hyperpessimistic Seller When the prospects of facing a high valuation B are so slim that take the sure thing is the strictly dominant strategy for S2, we say that S is ``hyperpessimistic.'' So, S is hyperpessimistic when b0 , b22. Note that the boundary that defines hyperpessimism, b22, is the same as discussed for a forwardlooking S and a myopic B, and optimal strategies are similarly the same. S2 offers v2 in both periods.
6 This makes it important to note the distinction between the buyer's strategy, y1, which need not be binary, and his action. His action is binary because in the end, he will either accept or reject. 7There are three types of PBE of this game: pooling, separating, and hybrid. S2 and 1 S1 offer the same period 1 price in a pooling PBE and different prices in a separating PBE. In a hybrid PBE, S2 randomizes between pooling with and separating from S1. In our analysis, hybrid PBE are special cases and are relegated to Appendix 2.

258

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels
Table 1 Pooling and Separating Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium Paths

Reading this table. Seller's prices are presented as follows: p1, {p2 if p1 is accepted, p2 if p1 is rejected}, or p1, {p2if p1 is accepted, low cost seller's p2 if p1 is rejected/high cost seller's p2 if p1 is rejected}.  indicates outcomes that do not occur in equilibrium.  indicates that high cost seller withdraws because she cannot trade with the buyer. Shaded cells have no equilibrium activity: For example, there is no separating equilibrium when the seller is moderately optimistic.

Because a hyperpessimistic S2's dominant strategy is take the sure thing, S1 can signal high cost by offering any price between the minimum acceptable to her, which we denote by pmin (and derive later in this section), and the maximum acceptable to the buyer, v1.
Importantly, when S is hyperpessimistic, B is certain to accept any offer that convinces him that S's cost is high. This is because if B knows that S's cost is high, then he also knows that her second-period price will be high and that it does him no good to reject her initial offer.8 So S1 knows that B will accept any price that signals her high cost if his valuation is high. She will, of course, choose the highest such price. So when the seller is hyperpessimistic, the equilibrium is separating. S2 takes the sure
8Proposition 1 in Appendix 2 defines the generic set of first-period offers that the buyer is certain to accept.

thing, S1 signals high cost by offering v1, and B must ``accept fate'' and pay her high price.9

3.2. The Reputation Space
When the seller is hyperpessimistic, i.e., when b0 , b22, the parties' strategies are affected by only the buyer's reputation. If b0 > b22, optimal strategies
depend on the interaction between B's and S's reputations. The key driver of this interaction is pmin, the
value of which depends on the reputation that S brings to the bargaining table, b0 2 (0,1).10 Lemma 1
in Appendix 2 uses S's initial reputation to establish that pmin is the larger of p8 and j1, where

p8 ¼ vþ À ðvþ À vÀÞð1 À b0Þd:

ð5Þ

9Lemma 3 provides details of the buyer's beliefs and strategy when the seller is hyperpessimistic. Proposition 3 formally states the equilibrium. Both are in Appendix 2. 10The seller's initial reputation, b0, also represents the buyer's initial belief about the probability that the seller's cost is high, and like b0, it is common knowledge.

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

259

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels
Figure 2 Summary of the Effects of the Parties' Reputations on Equilibrium Strategies with p 8 as Proxy for S 's Reputation

The proof establishes that if S1 is willing to offer p8, then B is certain to accept it even if the offer gives him no information about S's cost. In fact, the precise definition of p8 is that it is the highest ``pooling price'' that B is certain to accept in the first period.11 Importantly, this means that B will reject any pooling price higher than p8.12 Notice that as b0 increases (i.e., as the seller's initial reputation for high cost grows stronger), p8 increases. This makes p8 a good proxy for the strength of S's initial reputation for high cost, and we will often use it as such.
Figure 2 is a summary illustration of the main results. It shows how the initial reputations interact to yield the various equilibria. For the reader's convenience, the figure depicts seven regions, labeled I through VII. Each region describes a pooling or separating equilibrium. Region I of Figure 2 describes the separating equilibrium that arises when S is
11A ``pooling price'' does not change the seller's reputation. So, if b1(b0, p1) 5 b0, then p1 is a pooling price. 12Corollary 1 in Appendix 2 defines the generic set of first-period prices that the buyer is certain to reject.

hyperpessimistic, i.e., when b0 , b22, which we discussed in §3.1. The figure makes clear that to identify which region describes any equilibrium except that in Region I, it is necessary to consider both B's initial reputation for high valuation, b0, and S's initial reputation for high cost, captured by p8. For example, suppose that B's reputation is a little beyond the boundary for hyperpessimism, b22. Then, either region II or IV could describe the situation, depending on whether S's reputation for high cost is strong. If S's reputation for high cost is strong, i.e., if p8 is large, then Region IV applies; if her reputation for high cost is not strong, Region II applies. The same is true for all of Regions II through VII, and the balance of this section is devoted to discussing those regions.
3.3. A Very Pessimistic Seller As B's initial reputation for having a high valuation grows stronger (i.e., as b0 increases), S2 becomes tempted to offer a price that B would accept only if his valuation is high instead of taking the sure thing. This means that p1 decreases as b0 increases

260

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

(see Equation (3)). This is bad news for S1, for when p1 < v1 she cannot signal high cost by offering a price as high as v1 because S2 is also willing to offer this price. In fact, because S2 is willing to offer any price of p1 or more, S1 cannot signal high cost with any offer higher than p1. B will, therefore, reject any price higher than p1.13 However, until p1 falls to the point where p1 5 pmin, there remain some prices that are acceptable to S1 (i.e., prices at least as high as pmin) that are unacceptable to S2 (i.e., prices higher than v2 but lower than p1). Define b2 as B's initial reputation at the point where p1 5 pmin.14 Then, b22 < b0 , b2, means that S1 can signal her high cost by offering any price between pmin and p1. When b22 < b0 , b2, we say that S is ``very pessimistic.'' Figure 3 illustrates this
discussion and that of §3.1, showing the set of prices
that signal high cost when the seller is very pessimistic (i.e., b22 < b0 , b2) as well as hyperpessimistic (i.e., b0 , b22).
Any offer in the signal zone informs B that S's
cost is high, which also informs B that the second-
period price will be high. B, therefore, knows that it
does him no good to reject any such offer. Region II
of Figure 2 describes the separating equilibrium that results: S1 offers the highest price that signals high cost, p1, and S2 takes the sure thing.15
This equilibrium shows for the first time how the
buyer's strategy, and not just his reputation, can affect
the price that the seller offers. To see how this happens,
just note that if B were willing to accept any first-period offer up to his valuation, v1, then the (very pessimistic) seller would offer v1 whether her cost is low or
13Because S2 is willing to offer any price of p1 or more when she
is very pessimistic, any such offer would give B no new informa-
tion about S's cost (i.e., when the seller is very pessimistic, then (b1(b0, p1) 5 b0 if p1 . p1). Then we would have a pooling offer that exceeds p8, and Corollary 1 establishes that B rejects any such
offer when S is pessimistic. 14b2 is derived in Appendix 1 (see Equation (A.2) and accompa-
nying discussion). 15Actually, the highest price that would be a foolproof signal of high cost is just lower than p1, i.e., p1 2 , where  is some van-
ishingly small positive number. We ignore this nuance with no
qualitative effect. Lemma 3 gives details of the buyer's beliefs and
strategy when the seller is very pessimistic. Proposition 3 formally
states the equilibrium.

Figure 3

Effects of S's First-Period Offer on Her Reputation When S Is Hyper- or Very Pessimistic

high, and B would get no surplus. Because B is a forward-looking strategic player, he is willing to reject any first-period offer that is higher than p1 when S is very pessimistic. It is only because of this willingness that S2 chooses take the sure thing, S1 chooses to signal high cost with p1, and B enjoys positive surplus whether S's cost is low or high.
It is important to understand why B stands ready to reject any first-period offer that is higher than p1, even if the price is not higher than his valuation, v1. It is because, were he willing to pay such a price, then a very pessimistic S would offer it whether her cost is low or high. Then, however, the offer would give B no new information about S's cost (i.e., his posterior belief about the seller's cost would be the same as his prior). In other words, it would be a pooling offer that exceeds p8. However, as Corollary 1 establishes, B rejects any pooling offer that is higher than p8 when S is pessimistic. We further comment on this in the discussion in §5.
The Region II equilibrium also answers the question with which we opened this paper, and it provides what is, perhaps, the most surprising result of our analyses. The buyer actually winds up better off with a stronger reputation for having a high valuation. In short, this happens because when S is less pessimistic, high prices are more tempting to S2. As

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

261

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

a result, S1 must signal by offering relatively lower prices, a phenomenon that is clearly illustrated by Figure 3. The managerial significance of this result is immediate and powerful. Intuition, as well as analyses of one-sided uncertainty models, says that a buyer cannot be better off when his reputation for having a high valuation grows stronger. As a result, most firms understandably try to cultivate the toughest possible reputations as buyers, i.e., they want b0 as close to zero as possible. However, once we allow that the seller is also concerned about its reputation and may, therefore, seek to signal its cost, we see that the toughest possible reputation is not best for the buyer. When we derive optimal reputations in §4, we will see that the optimal value of b0 may be quite a bit larger than zero.
3.4. A Moderately Pessimistic or Moderately Optimistic Seller
As B's reputation for having a high valuation, b0, grows even stronger, there comes a point at which S2 is willing to offer any first-period price that S1 is willing to offer if she knows B will accept it. Figure 3 shows that this is the case when b0 5 b2 because then p1 5 pmin (recall that pmin is defined as the lowest price that S1 will offer). The important thing to note here is that when p1 < pmin (or, equivalently, when b0 > b2), S1 cannot signal high cost with any price that B is certain to accept. The issue that S1 must resolve, then, is whether it is optimal for her to offer the pooling price that B is certain to accept, p8, or if it is best for her to offer a higher price that B will accept only probabilistically. The answer depends on the strength of S's repuation for high cost. If her reputation for high cost is strong enough that p8 > j1 (i.e., if pmin 5 p8), then S1 is willing to offer p8 up to the point at which she becomes optimistic enough to offer a higher first-period price, which occurs when b0 5 b1.16 We say that S is ``moderately optimistic'' when b8 , b0 , b1 and ``moderately pessimistic'' when b2 < b0 , b8.
When the Seller Has a High-Cost Reputation (pmin 5 p8). When S's reputation is such that p8 >
16We derive b1 in Appendix 1 (see Equation A.3) and accompanying discussion).

j1 (i.e., pmin 5 p8), and she is moderately pessimistic (i.e., b2 < b0 , b8) or moderately optimistic (i.e., b8 , b0 , b1), Regions IV and V, respectively, of Figure 2 describe the pooling equilibrium that results. In either case, S1 offers p8 in the first period, and B accepts. Because B accepts p8, this price is also attractive to S2, who can learn then discriminate by offering it.17
When the Seller Has a Low-Cost Reputation (pmin 5 j1). When p8 , j1 (i.e., pmin 5 j1), then B knows that S1 will not offer p8. So, certain accep-
tance of this price is no longer optimal for him.
Region III of Figure 2 describes the separating equilibrium that results when pmin 5 j1 and S is moderately pessimistic.18 Like that in Region II, this
equilibrium is an example of how the buyer's strat-
egy affects the seller's offer. B screens-the-sellertypes by accepting a high initial price, v1, with large
enough probability to make offering this price appeal to S1, but too small a probability to make it appeal to S2. Specifically, B accepts v1 with any probability, y1, that satisfies 0 , y1 , y2, and this mixed strategy response invites S1 to offer v1 but forces S2 to take the sure thing.19 It is important to note here that on observing an offer of v1, B is indif-
ferent as to the outcome of his mixed strategy. If he
accepts, then his payoff is obviously zero. If he re-
jects, his expected payoff is also zero because his
17Note that when p8 > j1, the pooling equilibrium also holds if b0 5 b8. However, note that if b0 5 b2, then S2 is indifferent between take the sure thing and learn then discriminate, and the equilibrium is hybrid. Proposition 2 formally states the pooling equilibria and Proposition 4 gives the hybrid equilibria of the game. Both are in Appendix 2. 18S cannot be moderately ``optimistic'' when pmin 5 j1 because then, as Figure 2 illustrates, b1 5 b8. 19We derive y2 in Appendix 1 (see Equation (A.4) and accompanying discussion). The logic here is that if B's response to v1 was y1, > y2 then S2 would also offer v1. So to force S2 to offer a lower price, B must accept v1 with smaller probability than y2. A detailed discussion of B's strategy, including the reasons that no pure strategy is optimal for the buyer and why he must accept v1 with positive probability even though his surplus is zero, is contained in the proof of Lemma 3. Proposition 3 formally states the equilibrium.

262

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

strategy is such that a first-period offer of v1 con-
vinces him that he faces a high-cost seller who will offer v1 again in the second period. It is this indif-
ference between the outcomes that allows B to use a mixed strategy to screen the seller types.20 The bene-
fit to the buyer can be seen by noting that if he acted
nonstrategically (i.e., if he accepted any price up to
his valuation), then the seller would offer the highest price, v1, whether her cost is low or high. However, be-
cause B's response here is a strategic one, i.e., a
screening strategy, the seller is induced to offer the lowest price, v2, if her cost is low.

3.5. A Very Optimistic or Hyperoptimistic Seller
Region VI of Figure 2 describes the separating equilibrium that results when S1 is too optimistic to offer any price lower than v1, which is the case when b0 > b1, but S2 is not optimistic enough to offer
such a high price. The probability with which B accepts v1 is at least y8.21 However, y8, which is an in-
creasing function of B's initial reputation, b0, is not large enough to make v1 the most attractive initial price for S2 until b0 > b11.22 If B's reputation falls between the boundaries b1 and b11, we say that S
is ``very optimistic.'' When very optimistic, the most attractive price for S2 is p2, where

pÀ ¼ vþ À ðvþ À vÀÞd:

ð6Þ

Importantly, B will accept p2 even if he knows that S's cost is low. So, in this equilibrium S1 signals high cost by offering v1. B screens the seller types, by accepting v1 with any probability, y1, that is at least as large as y8 but smaller than y1 so that S2 is not tempted to offer this price.23 Because B is certain

20Indeed, such indifference is a necessary condition whenever a mixed strategy is played. 21Corollary 2 in Appendix 2 formally states this result; its proof in the Technical Appendix (found at Æwww.marketingscience. orgæ) explains details of the logic behind the result. We derive y8 in Appendix 1 (see Equation (A.5) and accompanying discussion). 22b11 is derived in Appendix 1 (see Equation (A.6) and accompanying discussion). 23y1 is derived in Appendix 1 (see Equation (A.7) and discussion). The detailed discussion of the buyer's beliefs and strategy when the seller is very optimistic is in Lemma 4, and Proposition 3 formally presents the equilibrium.

to accept p2, S2 learns then discriminates by offering p2.
Finally, Region VII of Figure 2 describes the pooling equilibrium that arises when S is hyperoptimistic, i.e., when b0 > b11. Then, B's initial reputation for high valuation is so strong that S, whether her cost is low or high, is willing to gamble and offer v1. B accepts with probability y8.24
3.6. A Summary of the Main Results Analyses of buyer-seller interactions have usually assumed that the parties are myopic or that only one is concerned about its reputation. We have shown that considering the key features of marketing channel interactions, specifically, the (1) longterm nature of the relationships, (2) fact that the terms of trade change from time to time, and (3) uncertainty that both parties bring to the bargaining table, yield different results. If myopic, the buyer is nonstrategic; he is a price-taker who accepts any offer up to his valuation. Reputations play no role in his decision; all that matters is how the offer compares with his valuation. The seller's offers depend on the buyer's reputation and her cost, but not on her own reputation. If her cost is low, she compares the expected payoff of ``gambling'' (i.e., offering a price, v1, that will be accepted only if the buyer's valuation is high) to that of ``take the sure thing'' (i.e., offering a price, v2, that the buyer will accept whatever his valuation). She chooses the price that, given the buyer's reputation, has the greater expected payoff (i.e., if the buyer's reputation makes her pessimistic, she takes the sure thing, and if optimistic, she price gambles). If the seller's cost is high, she has no decision to make; she prices high.
When we allow that the parties are concerned about the future and that each comes to the bargaining table uncertain about the other's reservation price, however, strategies are not so simple. A forward-looking buyer does not act as a price-taker and, as a result, may significantly improve his posi-
24Lemma 4 gives details of the buyer's beliefs and strategy when the seller is hyperoptimistic. Proposition 2 formally states the pooling equilibrium path. Note that if b0 5 b11, then a low-cost S is indifferent between offering p2 and v1. The equilibrium is then hybrid and is given by Proposition 4.

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

263

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

tion. Even when there is no haggling (i.e., the seller makes take-it-or-leave-it offers), he can often force the seller to offer lower prices than she would otherwise. Only at the extremes, hyperpessimism (Region I of Figure 2) and hyperoptimism (Region VII), are the seller's offers the same as they would be if the parties were myopic. However, new prices emerge in all of the other regions. If B's reputation makes S very pessimistic (Region II), then S1 offers p1 (which is lower than B's valuation, v1) to signal high cost because B will reject any higher offer. B, thus, enjoys positive surplus whether S's cost is low or high. When B's reputation makes S moderately pessimistic or moderately optimistic (Regions III, IV, and V), then S's strategy depends not only on B's reputation but also on her own. If S has a high-cost reputation, there is a pooling equilibrium with S offering p8, which is lower than v1, so again B enjoys positive surplus whatever S's cost. However, if S has a low-cost reputation, B screens the seller types by accepting a high price, v1, with a probability that makes it attractive to S only if her cost is high, which forces S2 to take the sure thing by offering the lowest of all prices, v2. When the seller is very optimistic (Region VI), B again screens the seller types, which causes S2 to learn then discriminate with an initial price of p2, which is lower than v1.
4. Optimal Reputations
Two related questions no doubt come to mind on examining Figure 2. In which region is it best for a seller like, for example, Microsoft to be? In which region is it best for a buyer like Wal-Mart to be? We address these questions in this section. We consider which reputations yield the buyer and seller the highest payoffs, the consideration of which enables us to offer advice on reputation management. The bases of this discussion are the seller's and buyer's expected payoffs in each of the equilibrium regions. Table A.2 in Appendix 1 presents those payoffs. We assume that each party takes the other's reputation as given. We, therefore, consider the following question: Given the reputation of the buyer (seller), what is the best reputation for the seller (buyer) to take the bargaining table?

We begin with the seller. First, as mentioned in §3.2, S's reputation is not relevant in Region I or on the boundary between Regions I and II of Figure 2 (i.e., if b0 < b22). S's reputation matters, however, if b0 . b22, which is because if S's initial reputation for high cost is maximally strong, then p8 approaches the highest equilibrium price of all, v1, and Region IV or V depicts the equilibrium.25 On the other hand, if S's reputation for high cost is not so strong, then Region II, III, VI, or VII describes the situation. It is easy to show that, for given buyer reputations (i.e., for given values of b0), if the seller's reputation for high cost is maximally strong (i.e., if p8 is arbitrarily close to v1), then the seller's profit in Regions IV and V is at least as large as it is in Regions II, III, VI, and VII if her cost is high.26 This combined with the fact that the seller's reputation is irrelevant when b0 < b22 leads to the following intuitively appealing remark.
REMARK 1. Whatever the buyer's reputation, if the seller's cost is high, it is optimal for her to have the strongest possible reputation for high cost.
Remark 1 confirms the intuition that in marketing channel interactions, a high-cost seller is best off with a reputation that matches its high-cost reality. However, what if the seller's cost is low? Then, while it is easy to show that Region V dominates Regions VI and VII from S's perspective, it is not necessarily the case that Region IV dominates Regions II and III. To see this, note that in Region IV, S's first-period offer of p8 will be accepted if B's valuation is high, so Region IV dominates II and III for a low cost S if B's valuation turns out to be high. However, p8 will be rejected if B's valuation is low, and then a low cost S's realized profit in Region IV is (v2 2 j2)d, while in Regions II and III, it is v2 2 j2 1 (v2 2 j2)d! What this shows is that when S's cost and B's valuation are both low, a high-cost rep-
25Specifically, p8 fi v1 as b0 fi 1 (see Equation (5)). 26If p8 is arbitrarily close to v1, then S's expected profit is actually greater in Regions IV and V (see Table A.2 for the expected equilibrium payoffs). A high-cost S's realized payoffs can, however, be the same in Regions III, VI, and VII as they are in IV and V, because in the former three equilibria B accepts v1 with positive probability.

264

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

utation leading to the equilibrium described by Re-
gion IV is ``inefficient'' while those described by Regions II and III are ``efficient.''27 Hence, we have the
following remark.
REMARK 2. If the seller's cost is low, the strongest possible high-cost reputation is optimal unless the buyer's reputation makes the seller moderately pessimistic and the buyer's valuation is low, in which case a high-cost reputation leads to an inefficient outcome.
The fact that a high-cost reputation is not always best for a seller may be somewhat surprising. We point out, however, that this is a limited caveat because (1) it applies only to a low-cost seller when (2) the buyer's reputation falls within a particular range (specifically, b22 , b0 , b8), and (3) it turns out that the buyer's valuation is, in fact, low. Because the coincidence of the latter two conditions is likely to be rare, the result that emerges is that, in general, the seller is best off with the strongest possible high-cost reputation.
We now consider the optimal buyer reputation. From the buyer's perspective, the ideal situation is for the seller, whatever her cost, to offer the lowest price that is acceptable to her. This would mean that S2 takes the sure thing and S1 signals high cost by offering pmin. While there is no buyer reputation that induces precisely this outcome, there is one in Region II that comes close to it. Specifically, within Region II, as the buyer's reputation approaches b2, S1's offer, p1, approaches pmin and S2 takes the sure thing. So, if B's reputation is arbitrarily close to but does not reach b2, the buyer essentially gets his maximum payoff no matter what reputation S has and irrespective of whether her cost is low or high.28 From this we have the following surprising remark.

REMARK 3. Whatever the seller's reputation, the optimal buyer reputation is b2 2 , where  is some arbitrarily small positive number.
This result is likely to be seen as counterintuitive. It says that a buyer like Wal-Mart should prefer a reputation that makes Microsoft believe that there is a significant chance that they have a high willingness to pay over one that makes Microsoft believe that there is almost no chance of this. Why is this optimal? The reason is that if Wal-Mart is extremely strongly reputed to have a low valuation, then Microsoft would not offer a high price if its cost is low. A low-cost Microsoft would expect more profit from take the sure thing. A high price would, therefore, be a credible signal to Wal-Mart that Microsoft's cost is high and, hence, that rejecting the high price does it no good because all subsequent prices will also be high. So, Wal-Mart winds up paying the high price. Now, change Wal-Mart's reputation so that Microsoft believes that there is a better chance that Wal-Mart's valuation is high. As Wal-Mart's reputation for having a high valuation grows stronger, there comes a point at which Microsoft would be willing to gamble and offer a high price even if its cost were low. At that point, to prove that its cost is high, Microsoft must offer a lower price than it would have to offer if WalMart's reputation had not changed. So, the basic logic behind this striking result is that a stronger buyer reputation for having a high willingness to pay makes it harder for a high-cost seller to prove that its cost is high, forcing it to offer a lower price.29

27If the equilibrium is efficient, there is a transaction in every peri-
od if trade can benefit both buyer and seller. If B's valuation and
S's cost are both low, then trade can benefit them both. 28To see this, first observe that in Region II, a high cost S offers p1. Equation (3) shows that p1 decreases in b0. Substituting b2 (see Equation (A.2)), into Equation (3) for b0 shows that p1 5 pmin when b0 5 b2, from which it follows that b0 5 b2 2  implies that p1 ' pmin 1 . Finally, observe that a low-cost S takes the sure thing for all b0 , b2. So, b0 5 b2 2 means that the price of-
fered by S is approximately the lowest acceptable to her, whatever
her cost.

5. Discussion
We have considered bargaining situations that typify marketing channel interactions: The interactions are
29The reader may be thinking, ``But this stronger reputation for having a high valuation might also cause the seller to offer a higher price if its cost is low, thus, eliminating the buyer's expected gains.'' This does not happen because the buyer's strategy is to reject any offer higher than v2 that the seller might have made if its cost is low, which forces the seller to take-the-sure-thing if its cost is low. Lemma 3 provides the details.

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

265

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

Table 2 The Key Findings 1. The Effect of Seller Uncertainty and Long-Term
Relationships on Buyer Power
2. The Effects of Reputations on Strategies
3. The Effects of Reputations on Outcomes

When the seller is uncertain about the buyer's reservation price and faces repeated transactions with the same buyer, she is often forced to offer lower prices than she would in a onetime transaction. This is because there is a credible threat that a buyer with a high willingness to pay will reject highpriced offers (foregoing short-term gains) to sustain the seller's uncertainty and obtain lower prices in the future (obtaining higher long-term gains). This is true even if any haggling is regarded as cheap talk and has no effect on the buyer or seller.
The seller's pricing strategy is influenced by the reputations of both players (i.e., by what the buyer believes about the seller's cost and what the seller believes about the buyer's valuation). The buyer's response to the seller's price is also affected by the seller's beliefs (i.e., by the buyer's own reputation). However, the buyer's responses are not influenced by the seller's reputation, because everything the buyer needs to know about the seller is communicated by the price she offers.
As might be expected, the seller's profit is almost always higher when she has a strong reputation for having high costs. But, surprisingly, the buyer is often hurt by too strong a reputation for having a low valuation. Ideally for the buyer, the seller will be pessimistic, but not too pessimistic. This is because extreme pessimism allows a high-cost seller to successfully signal her cost with the highest possible price.

long-lived; the terms of trade change over time; and both buyer and seller are uncertain about the other's reservation price. To gain insight into the best strategies in such situations and the outcomes those strategies produce, we analyzed a simple two-period model. From our analysis has come several results, and, for the reader's convenience, we have summarized the most significant findings in Table 2.
We now discuss the research and managerial implications of these findings.
The first key finding, that a forward-looking buyer has the power to affect the seller's prices even when there is no haggling, is significant because it yields outcomes that differ significantly from those obtained when the buyer is assumed to be a price-taker. Future channel research should, therefore, carefully consider the appropriateness of assuming

that downstream channel members (i.e., buyers) are price-takers. This finding may also be relevant for research in reference-dependent utility theory, which posits that fairness considerations explain the observed phenomena of buyers rejecting prices that do not exceed their valuations, and sellers offering prices that are lower than the targeted buyers' valuations. These phenomena cannot be explained by a standard, nonreference-dependent utility function if the buyer is assumed to be a price-taker. Invariably, the null model against which reference-dependent utility theory compares its predictions is one that assumes that the buyer is a price-taker. We have shown that the price-taker assumption need not hold in long-lived relationships and, hence, the same phenomena are predicted by simple, nonreference dependent utility functions.

266

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

Our second key finding provides an interesting and testable difference between our results and the predictions of reference-dependent utility theory. Reference-dependent utility theory predicts that the buyer is more likely to accept a high price from a seller if the seller comes to the bargaining table with a reputation for high cost (cf. Thaler 1985). However, examining the buyer's equilibrium strategies in our analysis reveals that his optimum response, yÃ1, is never a function of the seller's initial reputation, b0. The buyer may, however, condition his response on his own initial reputation, b0. In every situation in which the buyer is not certain to accept the seller's offer (i.e., Regions III, VI, and VII of Figure 2), his response may be a function of b0 (see Equations (A.4) and (A.5) in Appendix 1). Contrary to the conventional wisdom, then, the buyer's response to the seller's offer is not a function of the reputation that the seller brings to the bargaining table but may be a function of his own reputation. Note also that the price that the seller offers is sometimes a function of her own reputation; specifically, in Regions IV and V of Figure 2 the seller offers p8, which is an increasing function of the strength of her initial reputation for high cost. Thus, while the buyer's strategy is not a function of the seller's intial reputation, the seller's strategy can be.
Our third key finding confirms the intuition that, in general, sellers are best off with the strongest possible high-cost reputations. This finding is subject to the caveat that a high-cost reputation can cause a seller whose cost is low to miss out on some opportunities when the buyer's reputation falls within a particular range, and it turns out that the buyer's valuation is low. However, such inefficient outcomes are likely to be rare. Sellers are, thus, well advised to seek any means at their disposal to be strongly reputed as high cost-types.
Perhaps the most surprising finding of our analysis is that the buyer's reputation does not always lead to the types of outcomes that intuition suggests it should. Contrary to the conventional wisdom, in the typical channel interaction, a stronger reputation

for having a low (high) valuation can result in the buyer paying a higher (lower) price. It has been known that a buyer might wind up paying more if his reputation makes the seller believe that he is likely to have a high valuation (cf. Fudenberg and Tirole 1983; Hart and Tirole 1988). However, until now, it had not been known that a buyer might also wind up paying more if his reputation makes the seller believe that he is unlikely to have a high valuation. Buyers, therefore, seem to covet reputations that convince sellers that they have the lowest possible valuations in the belief that such reputations always lead sellers to offer the lowest possible prices. We have shown that this may be a mistaken belief. A high valuation buyer that has cultivated an extremely tough reputation is often paying more than he would otherwise. Because this result is new, there is an important managerial implication: Many firms probably need to reconsider the way that they manage their reputations as buyers in channel interactions. There are many tactics that firms might use to shape the reputations that they take to the bargaining table, a comprehensive analysis which is beyond the scope of this paper. One obvious tactic is the firm's policy with respect to its statements to the trade press. For example, if a retailer's current media policy is to emphasize in its statements that because of its low retail prices, it is strictly unwilling to pay high prices to its suppliers, it should probably adjust its rhetoric. Rather than focusing on low retail prices and, thereby, a tough stance against suppliers' prices, perhaps it should emphasize an insistence on delivering its customers high value for money spent and receiving the same from its suppliers. We leave complete analyses of such tactics for future research.
There are limitations of our analysis that should be noted. We assumed a discrete distribution of buyer valuations and seller costs, with two of each. While discrete uncertainty is a reasonable approximation of the way managers typically approach decisions under uncertainty, it would be useful to extend the model to the case of continuous uncer-

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

267

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

tainty or discrete uncertainty with arbitrarily many buyer and seller types. In our model, the seller makes the offers. This is probably the appropriate representation for most marketing channel interactions, but not for all of them. In relationships where the buyer is a more powerful player than the seller, it is more likely to be the case that the buyer makes take-it-or-leave-it offers to the seller (cf. Iyer and Villas-Boas 1998). It would be interesting to see if such an institutional difference would alter any of our results. We assumed a finite horizon, which is appropriate when the bargainers face a known end point, as is the case if, for example, the product becomes obsolete at some point in time. An interesting extension of the model would be the case of an indefinite horizon, which represents many actual situations. Closely related to the previous limitation is that our model captures what might be considered only a portion of the long-run relationship between a buyer and seller in a channel interaction. A channel relationship usually has a longer life than does any single good. Using the example with which we opened the paper, the new product that Microsoft introduces today will be obsolete in a few years, but then the firm will introduce another product that Wal-Mart will carry. Moreover, the cost of the next product to Microsoft may or may not be high, and Wal-Mart may or may not highly value it. So, while the products and their particular characteristics come and go, the relationship between the parties endures. It would be interesting to see how an extension of our modeling approach that captures this aspect of channel relationships might enrich the analysis. Finally, because some of our results run counter to conventional wisdom, they naturally lead to a discussion of the potential testability of the ideas presented here-- an undertaking that is beyond the scope of the current work. Thus, an opportunity for future research is to put our results to the empirical test.
Acknowledgments The authors thank Wilfred Amaldoss, Sherrod Banks, Mike Cucka, Alison Lo, Mary Frances Luce,

Jagmohan Raju, and Rafael Rob for helpful discussions; they also thank Bill Boulding, Preyas Desai, Kendra Harris, Debu Purohit, Rick Staelin, the editor, area editor, and two anonymous reviewers for valuable comments on earlier drafts of this paper.

Appendix 1. The Formal Model and Important Derivations
Define a1 2 {0, 1} as the observed outcome of B's Period 1 strategy, where a1 5 1 if the first-period offer is accepted and a1 5 0 otherwise. Then, as both buyer types accept any offer up to v2, applying Bayes' rule provides

b1

ð8b0 ><

; p1; b0;

y1

ðp1

; vÞ; a1Þ if p1 <

vÀ

;

¼

>:

ð1Ày1 Þb0 1Ày1 b0

;

1;

if p1 > vÀ and a1 ¼ 0; if p1 > vÀ and a1 ¼ 1:

ðA1Þ

To derive b2 set p1 5 pmin. Then, substituting into Equation (3) and rearranging terms yields

bÀ

¼

pmin

À

vÀ À jÀ jÀ þ ðvþ

À

vÀÞd

:

ðA2Þ

To derive b1, we use the result from Corollary 2, that when the seller is optimistic, the buyer accepts any p1 < v1 with probabil-
ity at least as large as y8. We equate a high-cost seller's payoff from p1 5 pmin when y1(pmin) 5 1, i.e., p1(pmin, j1) 5 [pmin 2 j1 1 (v1 2 j1)d]b0, with that from p1 5 v1 when y1(v1) 5 y8, i.e., p1(v1, j1) 5 [(1 1 d) (v1 2 j1)y8 1 (v1 2 j1)(1 2 y8)d]b0, and
solve for the initial buyer reputation that satisfies this equation.
The result is

bþ

¼

ðvÀ

À

ðvÀ À jÀÞðvþ À jþÞ jÀÞðpmin À jþÞ þ ðvþ À jÀÞðvþ

À

pmin Þ

:

ðA3Þ

Define y2(p9) as the buyer response to arbitrary p9 2 (v2, v1]
that makes a low-cost seller indifferent between p1 5 p9 and p1 5 v2. Derive it by equating a pessimistic low-cost seller's payoff from p1 5 v2 (see Equation (2)) with her payoff from p1 5 p9 2 (v2, v1], p1(p9, j2) 5 y1(p9)[p9 2 j2 1 (v1 2 j2)d]b0 1 (v2 2 j2)[(1 2 y1(p9)b0]d, and solving for the buyer strategy that satisfies this equation. Note that y2 is simply y2(p9) when p9 5 v1, the
result of which is

yÀ

¼

½vþ

À

vÀ jÀ þ

À jÀ ðvþ À

vÀÞdb0

:

ðA4Þ

Define y8 as the unique buyer response that will leave S2 indifferent between taking the sure thing and gambling in Period 2 if

268

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

Table A.1 Steps 1 2 3 4
5 6

The Formal Model

Description

Nature selects B's valuation, v 2 {v2, v1}, and S's cost, j 2 {j2, j1} according to the following commonly known probabilities: Pr (v 5 v1) 5 b0 and Pr (j 5 j1) 5 b0. B privately learns his valuation, v 2 {v2, v1}, and S privately learns her cost, j 2 {j2, j1}. S chooses the first period offer, pÃ1, that she believes will maximize her total (discounted) profit over Periods 1 and 2. Having seen the first-period offer, B updates his belief about S's cost to b1(b0, p1). With this updated belief, he accepts the offer with the probability, yÃ1(p1, v), that he believes will maximize his total (discounted) surplus over both periods.
S sees whether or not B accepts her first-period offer and updates her belief about his reservation value to b1(b0, p1, y1(p1, v),a1). In the second (and final) period S chooses the second-period offer that, given her updated belief about B, she believes
will maximize her Period 2 profit and B accepts the offer if doing so maximizes his Period 2 surplus and, otherwise, he
rejects it.

the Period 1 outcome is rejection. Then, to derive it, we set b1(b0, p1, y1, 0) 5 b8 for p1 . v2 (see Equation (A.1)) and solve for y1.
The result is Equation (A.5):

y8

¼

b0 À b8 ð1 À b8Þb0

:

ðA5Þ

We use Corollary 2 to derive b11. Set an optimistic low-cost seller's payoff from p1 5 p2, p1(p2, j2) 5 [p2 2 j2 1 (v1 2 j2)d]b0 1 (v2 2 j2)(1 2 b0)d, equal to her payoff from p1 5 v1 when y1(v1) 5 y8, p1(v1, j2) 5 (1 1 d)(v1 2 j2)y8 b0 1 (v2 2 j2)
(1 2 y8b0)d, and solve for the initial buyer reputation that satisfies
this equation. The result is Equation (A.6).

bþþ

¼

½vþ À jÀ þ ðvþ À vÀÞdb8 vÀ À jÀ þ ðvþ À vÀÞd

:

ðA6Þ

Define y1(p9) as the buyer's response to arbitrary p9 2 (p2, v1]
that makes a low-cost seller indifferent between p1 5 p9 and p1 5 p2. Derive it by equating an optimistic low-cost seller's payoff from p1 5 p2 with that from p1 5 p9 2 (p2, v1] assuming that y1(p9) > y8, which yields p1 (p9, j2) 5 y1 (p9)[p9 2 j2 1 (v1 2 j2)d] b0 1 (v2 2 j2)[1 2 y1(p9)b0]d. Observe that y1 is simply y1(p9) when p9 5 v1, the result of which is Equation (A.7).

yþ

¼

vþ

À

vþ À jÀ jÀ þ ðvþ À

vÀÞd

:

ðA7Þ

Appendix 2. The Formal Results
In this appendix, we present the formal results of the analysis. The proofs are presented in a Technical Appendix, which is available on the Marketing Science website at Æhttp://mktsci.pubs.

informs.orgæ. In our presentation of these results, whenever the buyer is certain to accept the seller's offer, we simply say that he accepts. However, if he responds to an offer probabilistically, we qualify his response by stating the probability (or the set of admissible probabilities if his response is not unique) with which he accepts.

PROPOSITION 1. Let

p ¼ vþ À ðvþ À vÀÞ½1 À b1ðb0; p1Þd:

ðA8Þ

The buyer accepts any p1 < p if p1 is ``small'' (i.e., if p , v1). He accepts p1 5 p if p1 is ``large'' (i.e., if p1 5 v1 5 p) so long as certain acceptance of p1 5 v1 does not make this price optimal for a low-cost seller. The buyer's optimum response to any p1 . p is to reject the offer
or to accept it probabilistically.

COROLLARY 1. If the seller is initially pessimistic, the buyer's optimum response to any Period 1 offer that is higher than p is to reject it.

LEMMA 1. (i) pmin is the larger of p8 and a high-cost seller's cost, j1, i.e., pmin 5 max{p8, j1}.
(ii) If p1 , pmin, then the buyer concludes that the seller's cost is
low.

LEMMA 2. (i) A high valuation buyer accepts any price up to p2. (ii)
An optimistic low-cost seller will offer no first-period price that is lower than p2.

LEMMA 3. If the seller is pessimistic, the buyer rejects all p1 2 (p2, pmin). (i) If the seller is hyperpessimistic, b1(b0, p1) 5 1 for p1 2 [pmin, v1]. The buyer accepts all p1 2 [pmin, v1].
(ii) If the seller is very pessimistic,



b1ðb0; p1Þ ¼

b0 1

for p1 > pþ; for p1 2 ½pmin; pþ:

The buyer accepts any p1 2 [pmin, p1] and rejects all p1 . p1.

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

269

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

Table A.2 Regions

The Seller's and the Buyer's Expected Payoffs in Each Equilibrium Region S2's Profit

Low Valuation B

High Valuation B

S1's Profit*

B's Surplus**

If S is S2

If S is S1

I

v2 2 j2 1 (v2 2 j2)d v2 2 j2 1 (v2 2 j2)d

v1 2 j1 1 (v1 2 j1)d

v1 2 v2 1 (v1 2 v2)d 0

II

v2 2 j2 1 (v2 2 j2)d v2 2 j2 1 (v2 2 j2)d

p1 2 j1 1 (v1 2 j1)d

v1 2 v2 1 (v1 2 v2)d v1 2 p1

III

v2 2 j2 1 (v2 2 j2)d v2 2 j2 1 (v2 2 j2)d

(v1 2 j1)d , p(.)

v1 2 v2 1 (v1 2 v2)d 0

, (v1 2 j1)y2 1

(v1 2 j1)d

IV

(v2 2 j2)d

p8 2 j2 1 (v1 2 j2)d

p8 2 j1 1 (v1 2 j1)d

v1 2 p8

v1 2 p8

V

(v2 2 j2)d

p8 2 j2 1 (v1 2 j2)d

p8 2 j1 1 (v1 2 j1)d

v1 2 p8

v1 2 p8

VI

(v2 2 j2)d

p2 2 j2 1 (v1 2 j2)d

(v1 2 j1)y8 1 (v1 2 j1)d v1 2 p2

0

< p(.) , (v1 2 j1)y1

1 (v1 2 j1)d

VII

0

(v1 2 j2)y8 1 (v1 2 j2)d (v1 2 j1)y8 1 (v1 2 j1)d 0

0

Notes. *The table shows S1's profit only when she faces a high valuation B. This is because S1 cannot trade with a low valuation B; if B's valuation is low, S1's profit is zero. In Regions III and VI, B's equilibrium responses to S1 's offers are not unique, so in these regions S1's expected profit is, likewise, not unique. **The table shows only a high valuation B's surplus because a low valuation B's surplus is always zero.

(iii) If the seller is moderately pessimistic: (a) If p8 > j1 then b1(b0, p1) 5 b0 for p1 > p8. The buyer accepts
p1 5 p8 and rejects all p1 . p8. (b) If p8 , j1 then

8 <0

b1 ðb0 ;

p1 Þ

¼

:

b0 1

for p1, jþ; for p1 2 ½jþ; vþÞ; for p1 ¼ vþ:

The buyer accepts p1 5 v1 with probability y1 2 (0, y2) and rejects all p1 2 [j1, v1).

The buyer optimally accepts all p1 2 (p2, v1) with probability y8 and he accepts p1 5 v1 with probability y1 2 [y8, y1).
(iii) If the seller is moderately optimistic,



b1ðb0; p1Þ ¼

08 b0

for p1 < pmin otherwise:

¼

p8

;

The buyer optimally accepts p1 5 p8. He accepts all p1 2 (p2, p8) and p1 2 (p8, v1] with probability y8.

COROLLARY 2. If the seller is initially optimistic, the buyer's optimum response to any Period 1 price higher than p and up to v1 is to accept with probability y8. If p 5 v1, the buyer accepts v1 with probability at
least as large as y8.

LEMMA 4. Define p3 2 (pmin, v1) as the lowest Period 1 price that satisfies p1(p3, j1) 5 p1(v1, j1) when B accepts p1 with certainty and accepts v1 probabilistically.

(i) If the seller is hyperoptimistic,



b1ðb0; p1Þ ¼

0 b0

for p1 < p3 for p1 > p3

The buyer optimally accepts all p1 2 (p2, v1] with probability y8. (ii) If the seller is very optimistic,

8 <0

b1 ðb0 ;

p1Þ

¼

:

b0 1

for p1 < p3; for p1 2 ½p3; vþÞ; for p1 ¼ vþ:

PROPOSITION 2. Pooling PBE paths arise as follows.
(i) If the seller is moderately pessimistic, b0 . b2, and p8 > j1, or if the seller is moderately optimistic, the PBE path is unique. Both seller
types offer p1 5 p8. The buyer's updated belief about the seller is the same as his prior, i.e., b1() 5 b0; he accepts if his valuation is high and rejects if his valuation is low. Given the buyer's strategy, if the Period 1 price is accepted, the seller updates her belief about the buyer to b1() 5 1 and offers p2 5 v1 whether her cost is low or high. If the Period 1 price is rejected, the seller updates to b1() 5 0 and offers p2 5 v2 if her cost is low, but if her cost is high, the seller withdraws from the in-
teraction, realizing that she cannot trade with the buyer. (ii) If the seller is hyperoptimistic and b0 . b11, the PBE path is
unique. The seller offers p1 5 v1 whether her cost is low or high. The buyer's updated belief about the seller is the same as his prior, i.e., b1() 5 b0; he accepts with probability y8 if his valuation is high and rejects if his valuation is low. Given the buyer's strategy, if the Period 1 price is accepted, the seller updates her belief about the buyer to b1() 5 1 and offers p2 5 v1 whether her cost is low or high. If the Period 1 price is rejected, the seller updates to b1() 5 b8 (recall that the buyer's optimum

270

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

strategy here, y8, is defined as that strategy that induces exactly this seller
posterior belief; in the event that the offer is rejected, see Equation (A.5)
and accompanying discussion in Appendix 1), and if her cost is high, the seller offers p2 5 v1. If the seller's cost is low, she is indifferent between offering p2 5 v1 and p2 5 v2 when b1() 5 b8, and in her indifference she offers p2 5 v1 with probability gÃ2(p1), which equals 1 when p1 5 v1 (see Equation (A.12) in Appendix 2). Therefore, a low-cost seller offers p2 5 v1 whatever the period 1 outcome (Corollary 2 explains the logic
underlying the seller's strategy in this condition if her cost is low).
PROPOSITION 3. Separating PBE paths arise as follows.
(i) If the seller is hyperpessimistic, the PBE path is unique. A low-cost seller offers p1 5 v2, upon which the buyer concludes that the seller's cost is low, i.e., his updated belief is b1() 5 0, and whatever his valuation he accepts. A high cost seller offers p1 5 v1, upon which the buyer concludes that the seller's cost is high, i.e., b1() 5 1, and he accepts if his valuation is high-but rejects if his valuation is low. As her first-peri-
od offer is accepted by the buyer whatever his valuation, a low-cost sell-
er's updated belief about the buyer is the same as her prior, i.e., b1() 5 b0, and she offers p2 5 v2. As for a high-cost seller, if her first-period offer is accepted, she updates her belief about the buyer to b1() 5 1 and offers p2 5 v1, but if her first-period offer is rejected, she updates to b1() 5 0 and withdraws, realizing that she cannot trade with the buyer.
(ii) If the seller is very pessimistic, the PBE path is unique. A low-cost seller offers p1 5 v2, the buyer concludes that the seller's cost is low, i.e., b1() 5 0 and whatever his valuation, the buyer accepts. A high-cost seller offers p1 5 p1, which makes the buyer conclude that the seller's cost is high, i.e., b1() 5 1 , and the buyer accepts if his valuation is high but rejects if his valuation is low. Because the buyer accepts a low-
cost seller's first-period offer whatever his valuation, a low-cost seller's
updated belief about the buyer is the same as her prior, i.e., b1() 5 b0 and she offers p2 5 v2. A high-cost seller updates her belief about the buyer to b1() 5 1 if her first-period offer is accepted, and she offers p2 5 v1. However, if a high-cost seller's first-period offer is rejected, she
updates to b1() 5 0 and withdraws. (iii) If the seller is moderately pessimistic and p8 , j1, the PBE path
is unique up to the buyer's response to a high-cost seller's Period 1 offer. A low-cost seller offers p1 5 v2, the buyer concludes that the seller's cost is low, i.e., b1() 5 0, and whatever his valuation, the buyer accepts. A high-cost seller offers p1 5 v1, the buyer concludes that the seller's cost is high, i.e., b1() 5 1, and the buyer accepts with probability y1 2 (0, y2) if his valuation is high but rejects if his valuation is low. Because the
buyer accepts a low-cost seller's first-period offer whatever his valuation,
a low-cost seller's updated belief is the same as her prior, i.e., b1() 5 b0, and she offers p2 5 v2. A high-cost seller updates her belief about the buyer to b1() 5 1 if her first-period offer is accepted, and she offers p2 5 v1. If her first-period offer is rejected, a high-cost seller updates to b1() 2 (b&, b0) (b& is derived and defined in the proof, which is in the Technical Appendix), and she offers p2 5 v1. Hence, whatever the first-period outcome, a high-cost seller offers p2 5 v1.
(iv) If the seller is very optimistic, the PBE path is unique up to the
buyer's response to a high-cost seller's Period 1 offer. A low-cost seller

offers 5 p1 5 p2, the buyer concludes that the seller's cost is low, i.e.,
b1() 5 0, and he accepts if his valuation is high but rejects if is valuation is low. A high-cost seller offers p1 5 v1, the buyer concludes that
the seller's cost is high, i.e., b1() 5 1, and he accepts with probability y1 2 [y8, y1) if his valuation is high but rejects if his valuation is low.
Because the buyer accepts a low-cost seller's offer if his valuation is high
but rejects if his valuation is low, a low-cost seller's updated belief about
the buyer is b1() 5 1 if her first period offer is accepted, and she offers p2 5 v1; if her first-period offer is rejected, her updated belief is b1() 5 0, and she offers p2 5 v2. A high-cost seller updates her belief about the buyer to b1() 5 1 if her offer is accepted, and she offers p2 5 v1. If her first-period offer is rejected, she updates to b1() 2 (b, b8] (b . 0 is de-
rived and defined in the proof, which is in the Technical Appendix), and she offers p2 5 v1. Hence, whatever the Period 1 outcome, a high-cost seller offers p2 5 v1.
PROPOSITION 4. Hybrid PBE paths arise as follows.
(i) Let k1 be the probability with which the seller offers v2 in the first period if her cost is low, and let its optimum be kÃ1. If the seller is moderately pessimistic, and p8 > j1, and b0 5 b2, then a low-cost seller offers p1 5 v2 or p1 5 p8, where kÃ1 2 [0,1]. A high-cost seller offers p1 5 p8. If the first-period offer is v2, the buyer concludes that the seller's cost is low, i.e., b1() 5 0, and he accepts. If the first-period offer is p8, the
buyer's updated belief is b1 () 2 [b0, 1], and he accepts if his valuation
is high but rejects if his valuation is low. If a low-cost seller's first-period offer is v2, then her updated belief about the buyer is the same as her prior, i.e., b1() 5 b0, and in Period 2, she offers p2 5 v2. If a low-cost seller's Period 1 offer is p8, her updated belief is b1() 5 1 if the offer is accepted, and she offers p2 5 v1; if the offer is rejected, her updated belief is b1() 5 0, and she offers p2 5 v2. A high-cost seller's updated be-
lief is b1() 5 1 if her first-period offer is accepted, and in Period 2, she offers p2 5 v1; if her first-period offer is rejected, her updated belief is
b1() 5 0, and she withdraws, realizing that she cannot trade with the
buyer. (ii) Let g1 be the probability with which the seller offers v1 in the first
period if her cost is low, and let its optimum be gÃ1. If the seller is hyperoptimistic and b0 5 b11, a low-cost seller offers p1 5 p2 or p1 5 v1, where gÃ1 2 [0,1]. A high-cost seller offers p1 5 v1. If the first-period offer is p2, the buyer concludes that the seller's cost is low, i.e., b1() 5 0,
and he accepts if his valuation is high but rejects if his valuation is low. If the first-period offer is v1, the buyer's updated belief is b1 () 2 [b0, 1], and he accepts with probability y8 if his valuation is high but rejects if his valuation is low. If a low-cost seller's first-period offer is p2, her
updated belief is b1() 5 1 if the offer is accepted, and she offers p2 5 v1; if the offer is rejected, her updated belief is b1() 5 0, and she offers p2 5 v2. If a low-cost seller's first period offer is v1, her updated belief is b() 5 1 if the offer is accepted, and she offers p2 5 v1; if the offer is rejected, her updated belief is b() 5 b8, which makes her indifferent between offering p2 5 v2 and p2 5 v1. In her indifference, a low-cost seller who offers v1 in the first period makes a second-period offer of p2 5 v1 with probability gÃ2(p1), which equals 1 when p1 5 v1. Therefore, a low-cost seller who offers v1 in period 1 offers p2 5 v1 whatever the

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

271

BANKS, HUTCHINSON, AND MEYER Reputation in Marketing Channels

first-period outcome. If a high-cost seller's first-period offer is accepted, her updated belief is b1() 5 1, and she offers p2 5 v1; if the offer is rejected, she updates to b1() 5 b8 and offers p2 5 v1
References
Cho, I-K., D. M. Kreps. 1987. Signaling games and stable equilibria. Quart. J. Econom. 102 179­221.
Fudenberg, D., J. Tirole. 1983. Sequential bargaining with incomplete information. Rev. Econom. Stud. 50 221­247.
--, --. 1991. Perfect Bayesian equilibrium and sequential equilibrium. J. Econom. Theory 53 236­260.
--, --. 1996. Game Theory MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 419. Hart, O. D., J. Tirole. 1988. Contract renegotiation and coasian
dynamics. Rev. Econom. Stud. 55 509­540. Iyer, G., J. M. Villas-Boas. 1998. A bargaining theory of distribu-
tion channels. Working paper, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.

Kennan, J., R. Wilson. 1993. Bargaining with private information. J. Econom. Literature 31 45­104.
Lilien, G. L., P. Kotler, K. S. Moorthy. 1992. Marketing Models, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 155.
Rubinstein, A. 1982. Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining model. Econometrica 50 97­109.
Schmidt, K. M. 1993. Commitment through incomplete information in a simple repeated bargaining game. J. Econom. Theory 60 114­139.
Srivastava, J., D. Chakravarti, A. Rapoport. 2000. Price and margin negotiations in marketing channels: An experimental study of sequential bargaining under one-sided uncertainty and opportunity cost of delay. Marketing Sci. 19 163­184.
Thaler, R. 1985. Mental accounting and consumer choice. Marketing Sci. 4 199­214.

This paper was received December 13, 1999, and was with the authors 17 months for 3 revisions; processed by Rajiv Lal.

272

MARKETING SCIENCE/Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer 2002

